A Scaffolding Design Framework for
Software to Support Science Inquiry
Chris Quintana
School of Education
University of Michigan
Brian J. Reiser
School of Education and Social Policy
Northwestern University
Elizabeth A. Davis, Joseph Krajcik, and Eric Fretz
School of Education
University of Michigan
Ravit Golan Duncan, Eleni Kyza, and Daniel Edelson
School of Education and Social Policy
Northwestern University
Elliot Soloway
College of Engineering, School of Education, and School of Information
University of Michigan
The notion of scaffolding learners to help them succeed in solving problems other-
wise too difficult for them is an important idea that has extended into the design of
scaffolded software tools for learners. However, although there is a growing body of
work on scaffolded tools, scaffold design, and the impact of scaffolding, the field has
not yet converged on a common theoretical framework that defines rationales and ap-
proaches to guide the design of scaffolded tools. In this article, we present a scaffold-
ing design framework addressing scaffolded software tools for science inquiry. De-
THE JOURNAL OF THE LEARNING SCIENCES, 13(3), 337–386
Copyright © 2004, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Correspondence and requests for reprints should be sent to Chris Quintana, School of Education,
University of Michigan, 610 East University Avenue, 1360D SEB, Ann Arbor, MI 48109. E-mail:
quintana@umich.edu


veloped through iterative cycles of inductive and theory-based analysis, the
framework synthesizes the work of prior design efforts, theoretical arguments, and
empirical work in a set of guidelines that are organized around science inquiry prac-
tices and the challenges learners face in those practices. The framework can provide a
basis for developing a theory of pedagogical support and a mechanism to describe
successful scaffolding approaches. It can also guide design, not in a prescriptive
manner but by providing designers with heuristics and examples of possible ways to
address the challenges learners face.
Recent educational approaches emphasize more ambitious environments for
learning in which learners engage in extended inquiry to develop knowledge and
skills in the context of investigating meaningful problems (Blumenfeld, Fishman,
Krajcik, Marx, & Soloway, 2000; Bransford, Brown, & Cocking, 2000; Linn,
2000). These learning contexts consist of more authentic, challenging, and
open-ended problems and thus require significant disciplinary knowledge and
metacognitive skills. Consequently, the need for pedagogical support tailored to
the demands of these more ambitious learning tasks has been an emerging focus of
design and empirical research efforts. An important construct used in design and
theory is the notion of scaffolding learners. Scaffolding has been traditionally de-
fined as the process by which a teacher or more knowledgeable peer provides as-
sistance that enables learners to succeed in problems that would otherwise be too
difficult (Wood, Bruner, & Ross, 1976; see also Palincsar, 1998; Stone, 1998). For
example, a teacher may provide strategic guidance, help learners set appropriate
goals, or perform difficult parts of a task.
This notion of scaffolding can productively frame empirical research, theory
building, and design. The idea of scaffolding has been adopted in research on tech-
nological supports for learning, which have become increasingly important in ped-
agogical designs. Designers have argued that software tools can support learners
by providing needed structure for difficult tasks (Bell & Davis, 2000; Collins &
Brown, 1988; Guzdial, 1994; Jackson, Stratford, Krajcik, & Soloway, 1994; Toth,
Suthers, & Lesgold, 2002). For example, Guzdial (1994) outlined one of the first
descriptions of “software-realized scaffolding” by suggesting three roles software
could play to provide scaffolding: communicating processes to learners, coaching
learners with hints and reminders about their work, and eliciting articulation from
learners to encourage reflection. Soloway, Guzdial, and Hay (1994) introduced the
idea of a “learner-centered design” approach to consider software-realized scaf-
folding with respect to the needs of learners. Soloway et al. argued that software
designers need to consider scaffolding for the tasks learners perform and for the
tools and interfaces learners use. Although support provided through technology
differs from that provided by human teachers or peers, the common idea is that the
task is modified (in this case by a tool with particular characteristics) in ways that
make it more tractable and productive for learners.
338
QUINTANA ET AL.


THE NEED FOR A SCAFFOLDING DESIGN
FRAMEWORK
Researchers have explored the design of software tools to scaffold learners across a
range of domains, and this work has yielded rich examples of design approaches
and research studies. There is a growing body of work detailing scaffolded tools,
scaffolding design strategies, and the impact of scaffolded tools on learners. Re-
searchers have developed theoretical frameworks to guide their designs such as
Linn’s scaffolded knowledge integration framework, which stresses integrating
scientific understanding with prior commonsense knowledge (Linn, Davis, &
Eylon, 2004; Linn & Hsi, 2000), and Scardamalia and Bereiter’s (1991) intentional
learning framework, which encourages learners to articulate their understandings
through structured discourse.
Despite these individual successes, accumulation of both theory and craft
knowledge about scaffolding design has been difficult. The field has not con-
verged on a common framework that defines a system of theoretical rationales
and design principles to guide the design and empirical investigation of
scaffolded tools. Typically, each research group proposes a theoretical moti-
vation and a particular set of design principles underlying their scaffolding
design, making it difficult to synthesize claims and results across contexts.
Furthermore, design arguments for scaffolding range across different levels
of specificity from, for example, arguments about the utility of graphical rep-
resentations in interfaces to more general claims for the importance of
externalizing planning processes.
We argue that advances in the field require an empirically grounded consen-
sus about successful scaffolding methods. This requires a common theoretical
framework to define and evaluate scaffolding approaches for software tools. Re-
searchers need a common theoretical vocabulary that allows them to characterize
and test the generality of claims about scaffolding, for example, to determine
whether two different tools implement the same theoretical scaffolding claim.
Principles must go beyond specific software implementations or a history of
tools from a particular research project and instead synthesize the craft and theo-
retical understanding of the field to guide new developments in software, empiri-
cal research, and theory.
Our goal is to explore the characteristics of such a framework for software scaf-
folding. We present a scaffolding design framework that synthesizes the work of
prior design efforts, theoretical arguments, and empirical work to develop a sys-
tematic set of guidelines and strategies grounded on what we understand about
learning. We build on current proposals of general principles such as the scaffolded
knowledge integration framework (Linn, Davis, et al., 2004; Linn & Hsi, 2000),
principles of learner-centered design (Quintana, Soloway, & Krajcik, 2003), prob-
lem-based inquiry (Kolodner et al., 2003), and others.1
SCAFFOLDING DESIGN FRAMEWORK
339


THEORETICAL FOUNDATIONS
The warrants for elements in a design framework need to be more than recognition
of commonalities across different design approaches. Design guidelines must be
defensible in terms of what researchers understand about learning and instruction.
In the scaffolding design framework presented here, we ground the guidelines on
complementary theoretical analyses of the nature of learning, the obstacles learn-
ers face, and the nature of pedagogical support.
First, we consider cognitive apprenticeship. The instructional situations we are
targeting fall loosely under this approach in which students become increasingly
accomplished problem-solvers given guidance from mentors through coaching,
task structuring, and hints (Bruner, 1996; Collins, Brown, & Newman, 1989b).
Cognitive apprenticeship provides a model of how performance of complex tasks
can be distributed, with others helping to minimize obstacles and compensate for
limitations by providing assistance at opportune moments. Second, we consider
cognitive models of learning by doing (e.g., Anderson, 1983; VanLehn, 1989) to
explore the nature of expertise in a discipline and the difficulties learners face in
working on rich open-ended problems. Third, we consider the perspectives of so-
cial constructivism and situated cognition, which provide an account of socially
situated tasks and describe how learning a discipline involves social interaction
and discourse dimensions (e.g., Lave & Wenger, 1991; Vygotsky, 1978).
Scaffolding can help learners accomplish tasks within their zone of proximal
development (Vygotsky, 1978) by providing the assistance learners need to ac-
complish tasks more complex than they could do alone in a way such that they can
still learn from that experience. Scaffolding in software tools can be characterized
in terms of the differences the scaffolding creates in comparison to some presum-
ably more difficult reference version of the task (Sherin, Reiser, & Edelson, this is-
sue)—it can, in fact, transform tasks for learners. We build on earlier characteriza-
tions of software that incorporates scaffolding (e.g., Guzdial, 1994; Soloway et al.,
1994) but emphasizes the transformative nature of scaffolding rather than a more
feature-oriented perspective. In our characterization, the scaffolding may not be
separable from the tool itself. Furthermore, by acknowledging the interplay among
teachers, students, software, curriculum, and other elements of a classroom
(Salomon, 1996), we intend to promote the notion that although scaffolding may
340
QUINTANA ET AL.
1The goals of this effort are complementary with those of the Center for Innovative Learning Tech-
nologies (2002) Design Principles for Educational Software project. That project is focused on devel-
oping a community resource, an infrastructure to pull together design ideas from learning environment
researchers. It is developing a networked database to which researchers can contribute their design ra-
tionales, principles, and examples. Hence, the approach takes an inclusive approach rather than focus-
ing on synthesis. In contrast, our aim is to distill the various proposals from the literature, find equiva-
lences, ground the design guidelines theoretically, and develop a consistent level for the articulation of
principles.


be provided in part through software, learners’use of it is mediated by these many
other elements. Thus, instead of using the term software-realized scaffolding, we
refer to scaffolding (or “scaffolding approaches”) within “software tools” (or
“scaffolded tools”); we intend to de-emphasize the notion that scaffolding is a
layer of supportive features that lies on top of software and that acts on learners di-
rectly and straightforwardly. Our analyses focus on how software tools in particu-
lar can provide scaffolding by transforming tasks in ways that lead to greater suc-
cess and opportunities to learn.
DEVELOPING THE SCAFFOLDING DESIGN
FRAMEWORK
In exploring how software can scaffold learners, we have developed our scaffold-
ing design framework within the domain of science inquiry learning. Consistent
with general notions in the literature, we define inquiry as the process of posing
questions and investigating them with empirical data, either through direct manip-
ulation of variables via experiments or by constructing comparisons using existing
data sets. We focus on this domain because it provides a rich corpus of literature on
the nature of the learning and obstacles in the discipline. Furthermore, it is repre-
sentative of ambitious learning, as the problems of managing investigations, moni-
toring progress, testing hypotheses, and constructing explanations are general to
many disciplines.
Given this domain, we organize our scaffolding design framework around three
constituent processes for inquiry synthesized from current descriptions of scien-
tific reasoning and related to other models of scaffolding (e.g., Hannafin, Land, &
Oliver, 1999): sense making, which involves the basic operations of testing hy-
potheses and interpreting data; process management, which involves the strategic
decisions involved in controlling the inquiry process; and articulation and reflec-
tion, which is the process of constructing, evaluating, and articulating what has
been learned. These processes entail tasks that are cognitively complex and are of-
ten implemented in social activity such as discussion, negotiation, and consensus
building. We expand on each of these processes in motivating each component of
the scaffolding design framework.
Method
Our goal is a theoretical framework that can be investigated empirically to identify
effective approaches for scaffolding learners. Identifying features from different
systems that represent a similar design idea with different interface implementa-
tions and disciplinary content yields useful candidates for analysis. However, a
theoretical analysis has to be grounded on the way the tool transforms tasks for
SCAFFOLDING DESIGN FRAMEWORK
341


learners; therefore, a framework requires more than an inductive analysis, and its
principles cannot be specific to interface features (such as prompts or process
maps). Thus, we employ a theory-driven approach, working also with observations
from an inductive analysis, to develop a system of scaffolding guidelines and ex-
amples. In this theory-driven, principled analysis, we analyze why particular ef-
fects of scaffolding are needed and evaluate candidate exemplars with respect to
their relevance to the need.
A principled analysis of the way tools can assist learners must begin with a de-
scription of the tasks being supported (here, science inquiry tasks). Furthermore,
the principled analysis requires identifying the obstacles learners face in perform-
ing given tasks to focus the scaffolding design (Quintana, Krajcik, & Soloway,
2001; Reiser, this issue). Although many of the obstacles and design solutions we
identify seem candidates for more general scaffolding guidelines, our claims in
this article are limited to supporting scientific inquiry.2
Our analysis attempts to synthesize current thinking in the field about the nature
of inquiry practices. The analysis draws on characterizations of inquiry learning in
science (Krajcik, Berger, & Czerniak, 2002; Minstrell & Van Zee, 2000; Reiser et
al., 2001; White & Frederiksen, 1998), characterizations of the more general na-
ture of scientific practice (Latour, 1990; Lemke, 1990), and core principles of
learning environments (Bransford et al., 2000). The analysis also draws on existing
design frameworks for instruction such as descriptions of project-based science
(Blumenfeld et al., 1991; Kolodner et al., 2003; Polman, 2000; Ruopp, Gal,
Drayton, & Pfister, 1993), “learning-for-use” (Edelson, 2001), intentional learning
(Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1992), scaffolded knowledge integration (Linn, Davis, et
al., 2004; Linn & Hsi, 2000), and communities of learners (Bielaczyc & Collins,
1999; Brown & Campione, 1994). Furthermore, we reviewed empirical studies of
the specific obstacles learners face in scientific inquiry framed around our analysis
of science inquiry itself and used the obstacles to help us identify relevant scaffold-
ing guidelines.
This theory-driven approach includes three main phases:
1. Characterizing the cognitive tasks, social interactions, tools, and artifacts
that constitute the scientific practices in which learners are engaged.
2. Characterizing the aspects of these practices in which learners encounter
obstacles.
3. Characterizing scaffolding guidelines that specify ways that tools can alter
the task to address the obstacles by helping make tasks more tractable and
productive for learners.
342
QUINTANA ET AL.
2Note that although our focus is on science inquiry, we did consider nonscience software in our
analyses if the software presented a key scaffolding idea we wanted to explain during our inductive
analysis or a good example of a solution to a problem we identified in our theory-driven analysis.


The result of this process was an initial framework we used as a structure to encode
patterns of scaffolding approaches that emerged from an inductive analysis of cur-
rent software tools. We then refined the framework through repeated cycles of the-
ory-driven and inductive analyses.
Our inductive process involved reviewing examples of scaffolding approaches.
We initially considered examples drawn from tools that were part of our own learn-
ing environment research.3 We evaluated these examples in terms of their connec-
tions to the obstacles we identified in our theory-driven analysis. As we continued
our analyses, we broadened the set of tools to include examples from a range of
learning environments in the literature. As we identified multiple examples that
were candidates of a common approach, we developed a description of the strategy
the examples represented and encoded that strategy as one way to implement one
of the general scaffolding guidelines.
For example, in our analysis, we found that one obstacle learners face involves
difficulty in keeping track of plans and monitoring progress (Klahr, 2000;
Schauble, Glaser, Raghavan, & Reiner, 1991). In our review of software tools, we
identified several systems with features designed to support learners by providing
ways to help them keep track of where they were in an overall plan. These included
the inquiry maps of the Web-Based Inquiry Science Environment (WISE; Linn &
Slotta, 2000) and the process maps of Symphony (Quintana, Eng, Carra, Wu, &
Soloway, 1999). We characterized these as a scaffolding strategy of providing task
decompositions and encoded that strategy within a more general guideline (identi-
fied in the theory-driven analysis) that highlighted the need to provide learners
with structure for complex tasks.
SCAFFOLDING DESIGN FRAMEWORK
The combination of the theory-driven approach and the inductive process in the
methodology we just described led us to a scaffolding design framework that in-
cludes several elements. The theory-driven approach helped us identify three ele-
ments. First, the task model includes the constituents of inquiry identified from the
literature—three interactive processes of sense making, process management, and
reflection and articulation. The second element includes obstacles learners face in
each constituent. We identified obstacles based on predictions from theories of
learning as well as results of empirical studies of learning through inquiry. The
third element of the framework is the set of scaffolding guidelines. A scaffolding
guideline specifies a way in which tools modify the task to help learners overcome
SCAFFOLDING DESIGN FRAMEWORK
343
3Our
initial
set
of
tools
for
analysis
included
Animal
Landlord,
Artemis™,
eChem,
ExplanationConstructor, Galápagos Finches, Knowledge Integration Environment (KIE), Model-It™,
Progress Portfolio, Symphony, and WorldWatcher.


obstacles (e.g., “provide structure for complex tasks and functionality”; see Guide-
line 4). The inductive process also helped us refine the evolving framework and
identify two more elements. We identified scaffolding strategies, or specific types
of implementation approaches that can achieve a given guideline (e.g., “describe
complex tasks by using ordered and unordered task decompositions”; see scaffold-
ing Strategy 4b). The final element of the framework is examples of features within
software tools that exemplify each scaffolding strategy. Table 1 summarizes the
framework’s scaffolding guidelines and scaffolding strategies we identified.
SCAFFOLDING SENSE MAKING
We begin our description of the framework by considering how to scaffold sense
making. First, we present a brief characterization of sense making in the literature
and then describe the sense-making challenges learners face. We then present three
guidelines for supporting sense making and discuss strategies and examples for
each guideline.
Nature of Sense Making
Sense making refers to the basic operations of science inquiry such as generating
hypotheses, designing comparisons, collecting observations, analyzing data, and
constructing interpretations. Sense-making operations must connect reasoning
about a phenomenon to a process for testing a conjecture and from the empirical
data generated in that testing back to the implications for the phenomenon (Klahr
& Dunbar, 1988). Some sense-making operations are general to experimental sci-
entific investigation such as “vary one thing at a time” (Klahr, 2000), whereas oth-
ers are specific to a particular discipline (Knorr-Cetina, 1996; Reiser et al., 2001).
For example, learners need to translate conjectures about a phenomenon into a hy-
pothesis that can be operationalized into a systematic comparison (e.g., testing
whether increased carbon emissions are associated with increases in temperature).
They need to see how different areas of science manipulate data representations in
different ways to look for patterns (e.g., comparing two histograms to look for a
difference in populations). They need to identify relevant variables from the de-
scription of a situation (e.g., identifying objects and forces in a physics problem).
Finally, learners need to interpret data in light of predictions to reason about the
implications of the data for a hypothesis (e.g., comparing predictions about the ef-
fect of temperature on a chemical reaction to observations of that reaction to de-
velop a new hypothesis).
Sense making involves formal scientific representations, which are very power-
ful tools in that they encode much shared expertise (Latour, 1990). Learners must
learn how to represent what is known or understood about a situation by making di-
344
QUINTANA ET AL.


345
TABLE 1
Summary of the Scaffolding Design Framework
Scaffolding Guidelines
Scaffolding Strategies
Science inquiry component: Sense making
Guideline 1: Use representations and
language that bridge learners’ understanding
1a: Provide visual conceptual organizers to give
access to functionality
1b: Use descriptions of complex concepts that
build on learners’ intuitive ideas
1c: Embed expert guidance to help learners use
and apply science content
Guideline 2: Organize tools and artifacts
around the semantics of the discipline
2a: Make disciplinary strategies explicit in
learners’ interactions with the tool
2b: Make disciplinary strategies explicit in the
artifacts learners create
Guideline 3: Use representations that learners
can inspect in different ways to reveal
important properties of underlying data
3a: Provide representations that can be inspected
to reveal underlying properties of data
3b: Enable learners to inspect multiple views of
the same object or data
3c: Give learners “malleable representations”
that allow them to directly manipulate
representations
Science inquiry component: Process management
Guideline 4: Provide structure for complex
tasks and functionality
4a: Restrict a complex task by setting useful
boundaries for learners
4b: Describe complex tasks by using ordered
and unordered task decompositions
4c: Constrain the space of activities by using
functional modes
Guideline 5: Embed expert guidance about
scientific practices
5a: Embed expert guidance to clarify
characteristics of scientific practices
5b: Embed expert guidance to indicate the
rationales for scientific practices
Guideline 6: Automatically handle nonsalient,
routine tasks
6a: Automate nonsalient portions of tasks to
reduce cognitive demands
6b: Facilitate the organization of work products
6c: Facilitate navigation among tools and
activities
Science inquiry component: Articulation and reflection
Guideline 7: Facilitate ongoing articulation
and reflection during the investigation
7a: Provide reminders and guidance to facilitate
productive planning
7b: Provide reminders and guidance to facilitate
productive monitoring
7c: Provide reminders and guidance to facilitate
articulation during sense-making
7d: Highlight epistemic features of scientific
practices and products


agrams and symbolic notations (e.g., chemical structures, equations). As learners
reason about a situation, they must modify representations to encode new infer-
ences (e.g., drawing vectors, attaching numerical values). Learners can further
progress toward constructing empirical tests, which can require encoding numeri-
cal data (e.g., by constructing tables or graphs). Scientific reasoning requires coor-
dinating these representations (Greeno, 1989; Lehrer & Schauble, 2002) and flu-
idly mapping between them to develop empirical tests and draw inferences.
Obstacles Learners Face in Sense Making
In the hands of experts, formal representations support scientific work, enabling
the detection of patterns and the testing of ideas. Yet what is easy for experienced
practitioners can be overwhelming for learners. Experts can see meaningful pat-
terns in problem-solving situations that may not be apparent to novices (Chase &
Simon, 1974; Chi, Feltovich, & Glaser, 1981; Larkin, McDermott, Simon, & Si-
mon, 1980; VanLehn, 1989). Consequently, learners are more likely to be dis-
tracted by similarities that are only superficial.
Therefore, when considering sense making, several related challenges for
learners emerge. First, there is a gap between the way learners intuitively think
about a phenomenon and the formalisms used to represent it in expert practice
(Reif & Larkin, 1991; Sherin, 2001). Thus, learners need support to map from their
understandings to disciplinary formalisms (Edelson, Gordin, & Pea, 1999). Sec-
ond, noticing what is important about scientific situations requires substantial con-
ceptual domain-specific knowledge, which learners may lack. Third, the expert
strategies needed to guide sense making may not be made explicit in traditional in-
struction (Collins & Brown, 1988; Collins, Brown, & Newman, 1989a; Merrill,
Reiser, Ranney, & Trafton, 1992), so learners need support in acquiring them.
We have identified three scaffolding guidelines that help learners overcome
these obstacles. They describe how tools can help learners connect their intuitions
and situational understanding with manipulation of scientific formalisms.
Scaffolding Guideline 1: Use Representations and
Language That Bridge Learners’ Understanding
Developing expertise in a discipline requires building the domain-specific knowl-
edge needed to guide the sense-making process and to work with disciplinary
formalisms. Learning requires continually accessing and building on prior knowl-
edge, so it is critical that new expert practices are connected with learners’ prior
conceptions and with their ways of thinking about ideas in the discipline (e.g.,
Clement, 1993).
Tools can support learners by using representations that connect with learners’
intuitions and also map onto expert practice. The representations employed in a
346
QUINTANA ET AL.


tool can shape how people conceive a task (Norman, 1991). In this way, the tool’s
structure provides this type of bridging scaffold, helping learners make the connec-
tion between their own ways of thinking about problems and the concepts and
formalisms used in more expert practice.
We identified three strategies for implementing this guideline:
1a. Provide visual conceptual organizers to give access to functionality.
1b. Use descriptions of complex concepts that build on learners’ intuitive
ideas.
1c. Embed expert guidance to help learners use and apply science content.
Providing visual conceptual organizers to give access to functionality is one
way of using representations that bridge learners’ understanding. Scaffolding
Strategy 1a states that software should help learners access and interact with
the software functionality in a way that allows them to think about the deeper
concepts and structure of disciplinary relations and not get caught up in surface
details. Examples here use various types of visual representations to organize
access to functionality, such as conceptual diagrams or representations of vi-
sual scenes (see Table 2). For example, WorldWatcher (Edelson et al., 1999), a
scientific visualization system, allows learners to pursue investigations and ex-
plore data in atmospheric sciences. The program uses an energy balance dia-
gram to help students understand what factors are relevant to investigate and
reason about what data to consider next in light of this conceptual organization
(Figure 1).
In addition, different disciplinary representations and language can be used to
anchor constructs and terminology in learners’ prior understanding and everyday
experiences as recommended by scaffolding Strategy 1b. The general notion of
grounding learner understanding by helping learners access familiar ideas on
which more formal concepts can be built is a widely used strategy in instruction
(Linn, Bell, & Davis, 2004; Strike & Posner, 1985). Doing so can support learners
in understanding disciplinary representations and terminology by helping them
reframe their intuitive ideas in terms of expert practice (C. Smith & Unger, 1997).
For example, Model-It™,4 a modeling tool that enables learners to represent and
explore causal networks that encode relations between variables (Metcalf, Krajcik,
& Soloway, 2000; Stratford, Krajcik, & Soloway, 1998), replaces quantitative ex-
pressions with more intuitive qualitative language when students are building rela-
tionships between variables in their model (see Figure 2). Other examples shown
in Table 2 employ language or visual representations to help learners build on their
informal prior understandings.
SCAFFOLDING DESIGN FRAMEWORK
347
4Model-It™ is available from the GoKnow Web site: http://www.goknow.com


TABLE 2
Software Examples of Guideline 1: Use Representations and Language
That Bridge Learners’ Understanding
Software
Description
Scaffolding Strategy 1a: Provide
visual conceptual organizers to give
access to functionality
WorldWatcher
WorldWatcher (Edelson, Gordin, & Pea, 1999) uses an
energy balance diagram to help students understand
what factors are relevant to investigate and reason about
what data to consider next
Astronomy Village
Astronomy Village, a software environment for space
science, uses visual scenes from laboratories to organize
access to data from satellites and solar system probes
(Dimitrov, McGee, & Howard, 2002)
Scaffolding Strategy 1b: Use
descriptions of complex concepts
that build on learners’ intuitive
ideas
Model-It™
Model-It™ (Metcalf, Krajcik, & Soloway, 2000; Stratford,
Krajcik, & Soloway, 1998) replaces quantitative
expressions with qualitative language when students are
building relations between variables in a model
ThinkerTools
ThinkerTools conveys the notion of acceleration to
students by having moving objects in a simulation leave
a visual trace of equally timed marks (White, 1984)
BioKIDS CyberTracker
The CyberTracker software uses “taxonomic common
sense” to allow students to categorize animals with
accurate, but understandable, intuitive classification
schemes and language rather than traditional biological
classification schemes (Parr, Jones, & Songer, 2002)
Scaffolding Strategy 1c: Embed expert
guidance to help learners use and
apply science content
KIE and WISE
The “Mildred” guide in KIE gives students content hints in
the form of questions to think about or thought
experiments to do; the WISE learning environment
(Linn & Slotta, 2000) provides similar hints
Knowledge Mediator Framework
The Knowledge Mediator Framework (Jacobson,
Sugimoto, & Archodidou, 1996) presents annotated
examples that include “expert commentaries” explaining
how a scientific construct is applied in the example
Why2–Atlas
The Why2–Atlas system for teaching qualitative physics
features a coach that tries to identify and address
different student misconceptions about physics by
engaging in a dialog with the student, essentially
modeling to the student how an expert might reason
about different physics concepts (VanLehn et al., 2002)
Note.
KIE = Knowledge Integration Environment; WISE = Web-Based Inquiry Science
Environment.


349
FIGURE 1
The energy balance diagram in WorldWatcher provides a conceptual organizer of
the constituent factors under investigation.
FIGURE 2
The relationship editor in Model-It enables students to specify relations between
variables in more intuitive terms.


Furthermore, as noted previously, learners lack the background knowledge that
experts can apply to a science investigation. Therefore, another scaffolding strat-
egy (Strategy 1c) that helps bridge between intuitive and expert disciplinary think-
ing is to embed expert guidance to help learners make connections to phenomena
they already understand while pushing them to interpret new phenomena. Hints
providing expert guidance have been a core approach in intelligent tutoring sys-
tems, which are designed to provide those hints in appropriate problem-solving
contexts (Anderson, Corbett, Koedinger, & Pelletier, 1995). For example, a hint
might suggest which part of a diagram might be most productive to focus on during
work on a geometry or physics problem. Another approach for providing expert
guidance is to embed examples that show how experts think about the scientific
constructs in a problem. Table 2 provides some examples.
We illustrate this guideline more fully by expanding on an example specific to
scaffolding Strategy 1c about embedding expert guidance. Students use KIE to
complete complex science projects focused on using scientific evidence and
claims to develop critiques, arguments, and designs (Bell & Davis, 2000). Because
it is difficult for learners to critique, debate, and design the way experts would, KIE
supports students with content hints in the “Mildred” guide (Figure 3). The guide
presents questions and thought experiments that students can consider to help
350
QUINTANA ET AL.
FIGURE 3
The Knowledge Integration Environment (KIE) “Mildred” guide contains differ-
ent types of hints to help learners understand content. Mildred also contains “Thinking Ahead”
prompts to foster productive planning.


them apply scientific constructs to their investigation. For example, a hint could
ask students to consider what might happen if an experiment about energy conver-
sion were conducted during the day rather than at night. These hints are modeled
on questions an experienced teacher would ask of students working on the project.
The WISE learning environment (Linn & Slotta, 2000) provides similar hints to
help move learners toward more sophisticated thinking about science content.
In KIE and the other examples illustrating this guideline, we see how tools help
compensate for the “bootstrapping problem” of needing rich conceptual knowl-
edge to guide learning. Tools can transform tasks to help compensate for the lim-
ited conceptual knowledge learners possess while at the same time helping them
build more formal knowledge for future use. Such scaffolding provides opportuni-
ties for learners to successfully solve problems, an important aspect of learning by
doing (e.g., Anderson, 1983). At the same time, from a social constructivist per-
spective, such scaffolding is useful because it supports learners in guided practice
needed to appropriate these disciplinary practices.
Scaffolding Guideline 2: Organize Tools and Artifacts
Around the Semantics of the Discipline
The previous guideline discussed strategies for linking new practices to learners’
prior understanding. Here we discuss a complementary guideline addressing the
obstacles arising from the need for learners to acquire discipline-specific ways of
approaching problems. Because expert practice relies on specific background
knowledge that learners lack, learners need support to implement general notions
of science inquiry in specific disciplinary contexts (Reiser et al., 2001; Schauble,
Glaser, et al., 1991).
Guidelines 1 and 2 both exploit the role of tools in helping shape learners’con-
ceptions of tasks. However, where Guideline 1 refers to using representations that
can be productively understood from the learners’perspective, Guideline 2 focuses
on the other side of the gap, helping bring disciplinary ways of thinking closer to
learners by making such thinking more visible in tool interactions. Such support
helps learners overcome limitations in their disciplinary knowledge by making
disciplinary semantics and strategies more explicit in the tools they use and the ar-
tifacts they construct.
We identified two strategies for implementing this guideline:
2a. Make disciplinary strategies explicit in learners’interactions with the tool.
2b. Make disciplinary strategies explicit in the artifacts learners create.
Making disciplinary strategies explicit in tools (Strategy 2a) can help learners think
about the steps they need to take in their work, building on the more general idea of
making thinking visible (Collins, 1996; Collins & Brown, 1988; Linn, Davis, et al.,
SCAFFOLDING DESIGN FRAMEWORK
351


2004). This type of guidance goes beyond decomposing the task into its constituents
(which we discuss in Guideline 4). Rather, in this strategy, designers structure the soft-
ware interface to make explicit the various disciplinary strategies learners may use.
For example, Galápagos Finches (Reiser et al., 2001; Tabak, 1999; Tabak,
Smith, Sandoval, & Agganis, 1996) uses a conceptually organized data query al-
lowing access to relevant data choices as students construct queries about ecosys-
tem populations (Figure 4). The data query requires students to communicate their
desired query in terms of disciplinary strategies such as making longitudinal (i.e.,
“seasons”) versus cross-sectional (i.e., “subgroups”) comparisons. Students need
to consider their goal in terms of these types of comparisons, so the salient expert
strategies students need to appropriate are made visible. Similarly, students must
identify what they want to compare in terms of strategic distinctions such as, for
example, examining how a variable is distributed or how a variable is related to an-
other variable. This forces them to focus on the type of comparison they wish to
construct and not on the superficial aspects of the comparison.
Tools may also provide support by structuring the artifacts learners create to en-
code their thinking in ways that highlight important disciplinary ideas or distinc-
tions (Strategy 2b). For example, the Animal Landlord (B. K. Smith & Reiser,
1998) provides a structured environment in which students can record their analy-
ses of animal behavior, encouraging students to distinguish between their observa-
tions and their interpretations, a critical distinction in such analyses (see Figure 5).
352
QUINTANA ET AL.
FIGURE 4
Galápagos Finches allows learners to construct a query by making strategic deci-
sions about the comparison.


Table 3 describes other software examples that make disciplinary strategies ex-
plicit through tool options and the artifacts students create.
Reflecting disciplinary strategies in tools and artifacts should help learners en-
gage in sense-making practices in several ways. First, this support can help learn-
ers build the strategic knowledge needed to participate in a scientific practice by
focusing learners’ attention on making strategic decisions they might otherwise
avoid (Reiser, this issue). Second, this approach focuses learners on the language
of the scientific practice, assisting them in thinking about and talking about their
ideas using the discourse norms of the discipline. Learners can engage in practices
that are more tractable for them than the expert practice but that share some key el-
ements with the expert practice, allowing them to act as legitimate peripheral par-
ticipants in the practice (Lave & Wenger, 1991).
Scaffolding Guideline 3: Use Representations That
Learners Can Inspect in Different Ways to Reveal Important
Properties of Underlying Data
Guideline 3 continues our focus on limitations in learners’ conceptual knowledge
aboutthediscipline.Herewediscusswaystoaddressobstacleslearnersfaceindeal-
SCAFFOLDING DESIGN FRAMEWORK
353
FIGURE 5
The Animal Landlord helps learners record their analyses of animal behavior into
an artifact that encodes observations and interpretations for each step of a behavior, creating an
annotated storyboard.


ing with the representations of a phenomenon they need to understand and manipu-
latewhenmakingsenseofthatphenomenon.Accesstoscientificphenomenaistypi-
cally mediated through the creation and understanding of representations such as
tables, graphs, equations, and diagrams. However, these representations impose ad-
ditional challenges for learners. Guideline 3 addresses these challenges by recom-
mending inspectable representations to simplify the process of mapping between
representations andtheaspectsofphenomena theyencode andhelplearners manip-
ulate and explore representations in different ways.
We identified three scaffolding strategies for implementing this guideline:
3a. Provide representations that can be inspected to reveal underlying proper-
ties of data.
3b. Enable learners to inspect multiple views of the same object or data.
354
QUINTANA ET AL.
TABLE 3
Software Examples of Guideline 2: Organize Tools and Artifacts Around
the Semantics of the Discipline
Software
Description
Scaffolding Strategy 2a: Make disciplinary
strategies explicit in learners’ interactions
with the tool
Galápagos Finches
Galápagos Finches (Reiser et al., 2001; Tabak, 1999;
Tabak, Smith, Sandoval, & Agganis, 1996) uses a
conceptually organized data query allowing access
to relevant data choices as students construct
queries about populations in an ecosystem
Scaffolding Strategy 2b: Make disciplinary
strategies explicit in the artifacts learners
create
Animal Landlord
The Animal Landlord environment lets students
analyze animal behavior using digital video tools
and a storyboard representation showing
student-selected video along with an associated
description for each frame (B. K. Smith & Reiser,
1998); this representation makes behavioral
analysis explicit to students, requiring them to find
and decompose complex behaviors into
constituents, categorize the constituents, and use
them to convey a story
Geometry Tutor
The Geometry Tutor provides facilities for students to
construct a Proof Graph; the notation in the artifact
makes explicit that proofs can and should combine
forward and backward reasoning and consist of
multiple paths from givens to goal (Anderson,
Boyle, & Yost, 1986)


3c. Give learners “malleable representations” that allow them to directly ma-
nipulate representations.
Scaffolding Strategy 3a can be considered to be the base level of this guideline
recommendingthatlearnersbeabletoinspectrepresentationstoseeimportantchar-
acteristicsofdataoraphenomenonsuchaspatternsindataorvaluesofdifferentvari-
ables. Table 4 describes some examples of software that provide inspectable repre-
sentations for learners. Note that in some systems, this strategy overlaps with the
earlierscaffoldingStrategy1bofusingdescriptionsthatconnectwithlearners’intu-
itions.Theearlierstrategysuggeststhetypeofdescriptionorvisualrepresentationto
use. In this strategy, we add the additional feature that the representation can be in-
spected to help learners see patterns about the inner workings of the phenomenon.
For example, the Density Learning Environment uses an intuitive graphical “dots
per box” representation in simulations to convey a model of density as how tightly
packed the dot “masses” are in each space so learners can inspect objects to reveal
mass, volume, and density relations (Snir, Smith, & Grosslight, 1995).
Representations can go even further when the task requires it. Scientific reason-
ing involves accessing different representations that highlight different aspects of
or ways of reasoning about a phenomenon. Scaffolding Strategy 3b involves pro-
viding learners with multiple views of the same object or data, giving them a
means to coordinate different kinds of intuitive and formal representations. For ex-
ample, one may need to graph the same data in different ways or move fluidly be-
tween aggregate displays and individual data records. Visualizations can be pro-
vided side by side to support simultaneous inspection (Linn, Bell, et al., 2004).
Table 4 describes examples in which software gives learners multiple inspectable
views of the same object.
ScaffoldingStrategy3calsobuildsonthestrategyofprovidinginspectablerepre-
sentations, but rather than simply providing multiple representations to inspect, this
strategyconsidersmalleablerepresentations.Here,learnerscandirectlymanipulate
oneaspectofarepresentation(suchasavalueinasimulationinputequation)andget
immediatefeedbackabouttherepresentation(suchasacorrespondingchangeinthe
simulation).Thiscanhelpmakeabstractconceptsmoreunderstandable(Linn,Bell,
et al., 2004) such as how changing one variable like dissolved oxygen can affect an
outcome like water quality (i.e., the abstract concept of cause and effect; Metcalf et
al., 2000). Table 4 describes various software examples in which students can di-
rectly manipulate representations and see their effects.
To more fully illustrate this guideline, we elaborate on an example of how one
of its strategies—Strategy 3b—plays out in software designed to support chemis-
try learning. In chemistry, different representations of molecular structure, such as
ball and stick models, wireframe models, and space-filling models, emphasize dif-
ferent molecular properties such as the number of and angles between bonds or the
relative sizes of different atoms in a molecule. The software eChem provides all
SCAFFOLDING DESIGN FRAMEWORK
355


TABLE 4
Software Examples of Guideline 3: Use Representations That Learners
Can Inspect in Different Ways to Reveal Important Properties of
Underlying Data
Software
Description
Scaffolding Strategy 3a: Provide representations
that can be inspected to reveal underlying
properties of data
Density Learning Environment
The Density Learning Environment uses an
intuitive graphical “dots per box”
representation in simulations to convey a
model of density as how tightly packed the
dot “masses” are in each space so learners can
inspect objects to reveal mass, volume, and
density relations (Snir, Smith, & Grosslight,
1995)
STEAMER
STEAMER allows students to inspect the inner
workings of a dynamic model such as various
components of a steam propulsion system
model (Hollan, Hutchins, & Weitzman, 1984)
Scaffolding Strategy 3b: Enable learners to
inspect multiple views of the same object or
data
eChem
eChem includes a range of visualizations
providing different views of the molecule that
learners build so they can automatically
generate correspondences between various
molecular representations (Wu, Krajcik, &
Soloway, 2002)
TableTop™a
TableTop™allows students to view data sets
focusing on aggregate or individual data by
examining an aggregate data display and
zooming in on individual data elements to
inspect that data record (Hancock, Kaput, &
Goldsmith, 1992)
WorldWatcher
WorldWatcher links the same location on two
different maps that represent two different
variables measured on the same spatial
display (e.g., temperature of the same
geographical area at two different months;
Edelson, Gordon, Pea, 1999)
Scaffolding Strategy 3c: Give learners
“malleable representations” that allow them
to directly manipulate representations
SimCalc
SimCalc lets students change a mathematical
equation by directly manipulating the
phenomenon being represented in a
simulation, or by manipulating the
mathematical expression and seeing its effects
in the simulation (Roschelle, Kaput, &
Stroup, 2000)


these different views of molecules (Wu, Krajcik, & Soloway, 2002). The system
enables students to automatically generate correspondences between various mo-
lecular representations (Figure 6). Similarly, 4M Chem Environment (Kozma,
Russell, Jones, Marx, & Davis, 1996) helps students link chemical notations to
SCAFFOLDING DESIGN FRAMEWORK
357
Body in Motion
Body in Motion translates learners’ own motion
into graphs through computer-based motion
detectors, thereby linking learners’ first-hand
experience of the phenomenon (their own
motion) with a symbolic expression
(Nemirovsky, Tierney, & Wright, 1998)
GenScope
GenScope lets students manipulate linked
genetics representations in which
manipulating the allele representation of a
gene causes a corresponding change in the
DNA sequence representation as well as
changes in the trait (e.g., wings, color) at the
phenotype level (Horwitz, 1996)
aTableTop™is available from the Sunburst Web site (http://www.sunburst.com).
FIGURE 6
eChem provides linked views of multiple representations of the same chemical
structure: the chemical formula, ball and stick models, and space fill models (representing spa-
tial relations between constituents).


molecular level animations, graphs, and videos of the phenomena to make connec-
tions between the formalisms of the discipline and the phenomena.
The eChem and 4M Chem Environment software and the examples in Table 4
vary in the nature of the connection between representations and phenomena, but
the core idea involves tools that help learners make the links between representa-
tions and their meaning. Such explicit links can encourage learners to process the
results of their actions more deeply, going beyond superficial understandings of
the representations. These links can also help learners be more productive in their
scientific investigations by enabling them to more easily test ideas and evoke more
understandable results. At the same time, sufficient practice may help learners ac-
quire fluency with the more sophisticated formalizations of the discipline, such as
force vectors or mathematical equations, so that they require less and less support
over time to decode these formalisms. Tools like these, then, help address one of
the most critical sense-making challenges for learners: the gap between the ways
learners intuitively think about a phenomenon and how it is represented by experts.
SCAFFOLDING PROCESS MANAGEMENT
Sense making involves the core processes in scientific inquiry, but learners need to
manage these processes, making decisions about what steps to take next in their in-
vestigations. In this section, we consider how to scaffold the challenges in manag-
ing the science inquiry process.
The Nature of Process Management
Classic models of problem solving contain both basic operations and a set of con-
trol processes (e.g., Anderson, 1983). Our characterization of scientific inquiry in-
cludes the process management mechanisms that direct the knowledge and strate-
gies needed to control and steer the investigation itself such as implementing an
investigation plan and keeping track of hypotheses and results.
Process management is particularly critical given the ill-structured nature of in-
quiry. A science investigation is ill-structured because it lacks a definitively pre-
scribed manner for how the problem should be tackled (M. Davis, Hawley,
McMullan, & Spilka, 1997) and because one cannot always define in advance the
exact process to find a solution (Newell & Simon, 1972; Simon, 1973). There is a
large range of activities to perform in an investigation, and one must constantly
take stock of previous work to select and perform activities that may take the inves-
tigation a step closer to completion (Krajcik et al., 1998; National Research Coun-
cil, 1996; Quintana et al., 1999; Reiser et al., 2001).
358
QUINTANA ET AL.


Obstacles Learners Face in Process Management
Managing the science inquiry process thus results in several related challenges for
learners (Quintana et al., 1999). For example, learners lack the knowledge experts
have about the activities that constitute inquiry and the procedures for performing
those activities (Anderson, 1983; Bransford et al., 2000; Springmeyer, Blattner, &
Max, 1992), so they may not know what actions are most relevant.
Second, learners lack the strategic knowledge needed to select activities and co-
ordinatetheinquiry(Bransfordetal.,2000).Indeed,incomplexdomains,thestrate-
gic knowledge managing the basic operations of the discipline constitute the core of
whatislearned,typicallythroughdecadesofexperience(Anderson,1983;Newell&
Simon, 1972). Without such expertise, learners can be overwhelmed by the com-
plexityofoptionsavailable,makingitdifficulttodirecttheirinvestigations,seewhat
steps are relevant and productive, and make effective activity decisions.
A third related challenge is that learners can be distracted by the less important
managerial “chores” that need to be performed throughout an investigation. Man-
agement tasks can require a significant amount of time and effort (Knapp, 1994).
Whereas experts find such management tasks annoying, learners who are trying to
maintain a foothold on more significant activities can find them detrimental.
Therefore, learners need support to help them automatically handle routine tasks
that are not as salient to the learning goals themselves.
Our scaffolding guidelines for process management help learners by describing
activity spaces in ways that structure tasks, specifying when and how to perform
different activities in a science investigation, and supporting the routine activities
that can divert cognitive focus away from the salient aspects of the task.
Scaffolding Guideline 4: Provide Structure for Complex
Tasks and Functionality
Guideline 4 suggests that tools should structure learners’tasks and tool functional-
ity should be structured to support learners in seeing what steps are possible, rele-
vant, and productive. Specifically, this guideline looks at how software tools can
constrain or describe tasks in ways that make them more accessible to learners.
The strategies associated with this guideline help learners by limiting the scope of
the activity space within which learners work. This is similar to how apprentices
are given parts of an authentic task rather than being expected to work on the entire
task at once (Lave & Wenger, 1991).
We identified three scaffolding strategies for implementing this guideline:
4a. Restrict a complex task by setting useful boundaries for learners.
4b. Describe
complex
tasks
by
using
ordered
and
unordered
task
decompositions.
4c. Constrain the space of activities by using functional modes.
SCAFFOLDING DESIGN FRAMEWORK
359


The first strategy (Strategy 4a) for structuring tasks involves restricting the rich-
ness and complexity of learner activities to a level in which learners can focus on
the most important parts of their tasks (Collins, 1996). In general, designers should
reduce the complexity of examples, visualizations, or models to make the science
more accessible to learners (Linn, Bell, et al., 2004; Linn & Hsi, 2000). For exam-
ple, students can be impeded by having to track down and use the large scientific
data sets that expert scientists would use in an investigation. Software can effec-
tively restrict the data collection task by providing learners with an authentic but
more manageable data set to explore. For example, WorldWatcher (Edelson et al.,
1999) contains authentic and manageable preselected data that learners can use to
focus on important aspects of climate investigations. Table 5 describes some soft-
ware examples that implement this scaffolding strategy.
A second strategy (Strategy 4b) for structuring tasks is to decompose a complex
task into its constituents following the notion that novices can be guided by making
activity spaces explicit in an interface (Favorin & Kuutti, 1996). Two approaches
to decomposing tasks include using unordered and ordered task decompositions.
Unordered task decompositions involve displaying an unconnected space of activ-
360
QUINTANA ET AL.
TABLE 5
Software Examples of Guideline 4: Provide Structure for Complex Tasks
and Functionality
Software
Description
Scaffolding Strategy 4a: Restrict a complex task
by setting useful boundaries for learners
WorldWatcher
WorldWatcher (Edelson, Gordon, & Pea, 1999)
contains preselected data (e.g., specific sets of
climate data) that are relevant and
manageable in size so learners can access and
examine them, but rich enough to be
educationally useful
Media Fusion
Media Fusion can be seeded with video clip
libraries (e.g., clips of global warming
experts) so students can create digital video
linked to data analysis tools to convey their
understanding of some domain (Bellamy,
1996)
Scaffolding Strategy 4b: Describe complex tasks
by using ordered and unordered task
decompositions
Symphony
The main inquiry process map in Symphony’s
planning workspace decomposes an
investigation into manageable components by
visually describing the space of possible
inquiry activities (Quintana, Eng, Carra, Wu,
& Soloway, 1999)


ity possibilities so learners can see the space of possible activities without explic-
itly being given specific activity sequences or selections. Ordered task decomposi-
tions involve using representations that can be categorized generally as
classification diagrams, which describe processes and their constituents (Kress &
van Leeuwen, 1996) to display the steps and sequence needed to perform an activ-
ity. KIE, for example, uses a checklist of inquiry activities to show learners the se-
SCAFFOLDING DESIGN FRAMEWORK
361
KIE/WISE
KIE uses an ordered checklist of inquiry
tasks to show learners the sequential parts
of an activity (Bell, Davis, & Linn, 1995);
WISE (Linn & Slotta, 2000) changed the
analogous interface feature to instead involve
unordered task decompositions, allowing
more fluid movement among tasks
Personal Assistants for Learning (PALs)
PALs help students interpret and apply
important physics concepts and principles,
(e.g., Newton’s mechanics) with an explicit
visual representation of qualitative reasoning
processes so students can see the process they
should be following (Reif & Scott, 1999)
Emile
Emile uses pull down “design stage” menus
that describe the different steps involved in
the design stages of a programming project
(Guzdial, 1994)
Scaffolding Strategy 4c: Constrain the space of
activities by using functional modes
Model-It™
Model-It™ contains three functional modes: the
“plan mode” only allows model planning
tasks and tools, the “build mode” only allows
model building tasks and tools, and the “test
mode” allows only model testing tasks and
tools (Metcalf et al., 2000)
Galápagos Finches
Galápagos Finches has different areas
corresponding to different aspects of learners’
investigation: areas about the environment,
the populations they are studying in that
environment, field notes, and so forth (Reiser
et al., 2001; Tabak, Smith, Sandoval, &
Reiser, 1996)
Training Wheels
Training Wheels organized and constrained the
user interface to only allow certain functional
paths through the software by identifying and
disallowing functionality that new users were
not ready for or could be confused by (Carroll
& Carrithers, 1984)
Note.
KIE = Knowledge Integration Environment; WISE = Web-Based Inquiry Science Environ-
ment.


quential parts of an activity (Figure 7). Students complete one activity before mov-
ing on to the next (Bell, Davis, & Linn, 1995). In subsequent work on WISE (Linn
& Slotta, 2000), the interface supports unordered task decompositions, allowing
more fluid movement among tasks. Another unordered task decomposition for in-
quiry is the process map in Symphony (Figure 8). Table 5 describes other examples
of software using task representations for learners.
362
QUINTANA ET AL.
FIGURE 7
The Knowledge Integration Environment (KIE) uses an activity checklist to
structure the different activities involved in science work.
FIGURE 8
The Symphony planning workspace uses a process map to visually describe the
space of possible inquiry activities.


Structuring a complex set of tasks can also be supported through scaffolding
Strategy 4c, which states that designers can constrain the space of activities by in-
corporating functional modes that offer only certain relevant subsets of software
functionality. This is somewhat similar to Strategy 4b. However, whereas the task
decomposition Strategy 4b deals with the visual description of task sequences or
activity spaces on the software interface, the functional modes Strategy 4c is con-
cerned with what software tools are provided and when. Tools with a more con-
strained and streamlined approach help learners make progress in a new domain
(Rosson, Carroll, & Bellamy, 1990). Constraining activity spaces with functional
modes is a way to prevent learners from facing an overwhelming situation in which
all possible tools and functions are available. Table 5 describes some examples of
software that use functional modes to constrain the space of activities for learners.
We can use Model-It to illustrate the guideline of providing structure for tasks
and functionality by looking at the two scaffolding strategies about task decompo-
sitions (Strategy 4b) and functional modes (Strategy 4c). The implementation of
Strategy 4b in Model-It is an activity palette to display the high-level tasks in-
volved in system modeling. The palette consists of three options representing the
three key components of modeling—plan, build, and test (Metcalf et al., 2000).
This serves as an ordered task decomposition; the palette makes the activity struc-
ture visible to learners and only allows learners to progress to the next step after
they have completed each phase. The implementation of Strategy 4c in Model-It
involves using three functional modes accessible from that palette: From each
mode (i.e., plan, build, and test), only the relevant tools associated with that phase
of activity are accessible, simplifying the choices to relevant options and prevent-
ing the potentially overwhelming situation in which all modeling tools are avail-
able at all times.
In Model-It and the other examples illustrating Guideline 4, one sees how soft-
ware tools can help learners make decisions to drive and coordinate their inquiry.
Specifically, some of the tools constrain what learners can access or engage in at a
given time (or at all) to limit their activity space. Other examples show how tools
can describe the tasks learners are to do in ways that are more structured and thus
more manageable. As in a person-to-person cognitive apprenticeship, this aspect
of scaffolding provides learners with manageable tasks on which they can work.
Scaffolding Guideline 5: Embed Expert Guidance About
Scientific Practices
The sense-making scaffolding guidelines described earlier focused on how tools
can help learners understand and develop knowledge to engage in the substance of
scientific practices. Guideline 4, our first process management guideline, empha-
sized how software tools can describe or constrain activity spaces to make tasks
more tractable for learners. Now, Guideline 5 provides another approach for in-
SCAFFOLDING DESIGN FRAMEWORK
363


creasing the tractability of tasks to help learners manage the processes entailed in
the scientific practices.
Experts engaging in inquiry may see clear paths and strategies. Learners, how-
ever, rely on less elaborated and sophisticated understandings of the practice and
thus encounter obstacles in understanding the specifics of performing scientific
practices. Guideline 5 recommends providing access to expert knowledge about
scientific practices (e.g., explaining, observing, and inferring) so learners can
understand both how and why they should embark on a particular task and how to
strategically steer their investigation. Expert knowledge can be made available to
learners in tools that parallel the guidance provided in a more traditional,
person-to-person cognitive apprenticeship. This can help learners understand the
nature and rationale for scientific practices.
We identified two strategies for implementing this guideline:
5a. Embed expert guidance to clarify characteristics of scientific practices.
5b. Embed expert guidance to indicate the rationales for scientific practices.
First, embedding contextualized expert guidance can help learners develop
competence in the scientific practices they are trying to learn (Bransford et al.,
2000). Scaffolding Strategy 5a then recommends embedding expert guidance
about the characteristics of scientific practices to help learners understand these
practices and identify appropriate steps to take as they engage in them. Such expert
guidance can be embedded in software with hints or prompts that elaborate and
clarify different aspects of scientific practices such as providing criteria or specific
goals learners need to understand to guide the investigation. Table 6 describes soft-
ware that provides expert guidance through hints, guiding questions, and examples
learners can study to understand why experts made the decisions they made; one
example, from KIE, is further elaborated later.
A related point is that learners also need to understand the reasons behind the
different scientific practices they are performing, which may be difficult for
them (Collins, 1996). Therefore, another scaffolding strategy for providing ex-
pert knowledge—Strategy 5b—recommends conveying to learners the rationales
for performing different scientific practices. Table 6 provides some examples of
this strategy.
Elaborating on an example from KIE illustrates both strategies. The Mildred
guide in KIE provides hints in the form of information or explanations (Bell & Da-
vis, 2000). For example, Mildred provides guidance about the process of critiquing
evidence, suggesting that students should pay attention to the credibility of sources
and other criteria. This helps them engage in the scientific practice of critique by
giving them heuristics for critiquing (an aspect of scaffolding Strategy 5a). Fur-
thermore, KIE addresses scaffolding Strategy 5b with a “Why to do it?” button that
describes rationales for the different learning activities (E. A. Davis & Bell, 2001).
364
QUINTANA ET AL.


365
TABLE 6
Software Examples of Guideline 5: Embed Expert Guidance About
Scientific Practices
Software
Description
Scaffolding Strategy 5a: Embed expert guidance
to clarify characteristics of scientific practices
KIE and WISE
The “Mildred” guide in KIE provides process
hints in the form of information or
explanations (e.g., explaining the term
critique if students are critiquing evidence) by
suggesting that they pay attention to the
credibility of sources and other criteria (Bell
& Davis, 2000)
ExplanationConstructor
The ExplanationConstructor contains
explanation guides that help learners
understand the specific constituents an
explanation needs to contain to address
questions in the target discipline (Sandoval,
2003)
Sherlock
Sherlock (Lesgold, Lajoie, Bunzo, & Eggan,
1992) is a coached practice environment in
which students learn to troubleshoot complex
electronics equipment by studying an expert
solution to a problem they have solved and
contrasting their problem-solving moves with
those of the expert
Scaffolding Strategy 5b: Embed expert guidance
to indicate the rationales for scientific
practices
KIE and WISE
KIE contains a “Why to do it?” button that
describes rationales for the different learning
activities; although most students do not use
this form of guidance (E. A. Davis & Bell,
2001), it may be important to have available
Symphony
Symphony embeds rollover activity rationale
guides describing the different activities
shown in the main process map as students
plan their investigations (Quintana, Eng,
Carra, Wu, & Soloway, 1999; Quintana,
Krajcik, & Soloway, 2002)
Goal-based scenario (GBS) software
A GBS is a highly contextualized simulated
system consisting of different video-based
coaches, experts, and critics for a range of
domains (e.g., disease diagnosis, art history,
and criticism) to interject commentary about
the course of action learners took in the
simulation (Schank & Cleary, 1995)
Note.
KIE = Knowledge Integration Environment; WISE = Web-Based Inquiry Science
Environment.


It is important to emphasize the difference between Guideline 5, which focuses
on providing expert guidance about engaging in scientific practices, and the
sense-making guidelines, which are focused on helping learners implement the op-
erations of sense making such as examining and drawing inferences from data. The
examples here for Guideline 5 illustrate software tools that can help learners make
strategic decisions about how to engage in their scientific investigation by telling
them both what the important scientific practices are and why they are important,
as a mentor might tell an apprentice.
Scaffolding Guideline 6: Automatically Handle Nonsalient,
Routine Tasks
Whereas the previous two process management guidelines focused on structuring
and embedding expert guidance about scientific practices, Guideline 6 provides
further process management support by reducing the cognitive load learners need
to bear as they engage in scientific inquiry. Engaging in complex practices requires
concentration on salient activities to reach an optimal state of deep cognitive focus
(Csikszentmihalyi, 1991). Such a focused state is important for learning, but to
reach such a state, it is especially important to minimize distractions and disrup-
tions that can interfere with the sense of deep engagement in the work at hand
(Miyata & Norman, 1986).
Because potential disruptions for learners can arise from having to deal with
management and navigational tasks, Guideline 6 recommends automatically han-
dling such nonsalient, routine tasks. This approach builds on prior conceptualiza-
tions of technology as minimizing the overhead for complex work (e.g., arguments
for calculators in mathematics learning) and as cognitive tools that offload
nonproductive work, thereby reducing the load on memory and cognitive re-
sources (Anderson, Boyle, & Reiser, 1985; Anderson et al., 1995).
We identified three strategies for implementing this guideline:
6a. Automate nonsalient portions of tasks to reduce cognitive demands.
6b. Facilitate the organization of work products.
6c. Facilitate navigation among tools and activities.
One strategy (Strategy 6a) to reduce the distraction for learners is to have soft-
ware perform routine tasks, such as calculating results or drawing graphs, that
might prohibit them from focusing on important tasks more relevant to their learn-
ing goals. Table 7 describes examples of such task automation.
Other examples of distracting tasks involve the managerial aspects of complex
practices such as managing artifacts like data sets, models, plans, and notes. Scaf-
folding Strategy 6b suggests facilitating artifact organization with a buffer layer
between learners and the computer file system so learners can easily save, orga-
366
QUINTANA ET AL.


TABLE 7
Software Examples of Guideline 6: Automatically Handle Nonsalient,
Routine tasks
Software
Description
Scaffolding Strategy 6a: Automate nonsalient
portions of tasks to reduce cognitive demands
Galápagos Finches
Galápagos Finches automatically generates
graphs for student-specified data so students
can focus on the more important work of
determining appropriate comparisons for
testing their hypotheses (Reiser et al., 2001)
Model-It™
Model-It™ automatically calculates variable
values given student-defined relationships
during a system model run so students can
focus on understanding the overall behavior
of their model rather than diverting their
attention to the variable calculations (Metcalf,
Krajcik, & Soloway, 2000)
Geometer’s Sketchpad™a
Geometer’s Sketchpad™automatically generates
different geometrical structures for students
so they can focus on examining and learning
different properties of these structures
(Jackiw, 1995)
Scaffolding Strategy 6b: Facilitate the
organization of work products
Galápagos Finches
Galápagos Finches has a data log that acts as a
repository where students can easily store
different graphs and data sets they create
during their investigation
TableTop™
As students analyze data, TableTop™allows
them to capture and organize plots in a
slideshow-like artifact where they can
annotate and present data (Hancock, Kaput, &
Goldsmith, 1992)
Scaffolding Strategy 6c: Facilitate navigation
among tools and activities
Symphony
Symphony uses tabbed activity workspaces that
allow students to quickly open different
workspaces for different activities and
quickly navigate between them (Quintana,
Eng, Carra, & Soloway, 1999; Quintana,
Krajcik, & Soloway, 2002)
Smithtown
Smithtown, a discovery environment for
learning about economics, gives students
palettes to easily switch between different
tools and activities for collecting, organizing,
and viewing data as they develop economic
models (Shute, Glaser, & Raghavan, 1989)
aGeometer’s
Sketchpad™
is
available
from
the
Key
Curriculum
Press
Web
site
(http://www.keypress.com).


nize, and find artifacts. Table 7 describes several examples of software features
that facilitate the organization of work products.
Besides dealing with the distractions involved with artifact organization, learn-
ers also can be distracted by moving between the different software tools they may
use in an investigation. Scaffolding Strategy 6c suggests facilitating seamless navi-
gation among tools and activities to avoid the distraction of having to move to the
underlying operating system to launch or shift between tools. Table 7 describes
some examples.
We can illustrate Guideline 6 more fully with an example from the Galápagos
Finches software (Reiser et al., 2001; Tabak, Smith, Sandoval, & Reiser, 1996).
First, Galápagos Finches automatically draws graphs—the less important part of
the task—for student-specified data so students can focus on the more important
task of using the graphs to determine appropriate comparisons for testing their hy-
potheses (scaffolding Strategy 6a). Galápagos Finches also has a data log that acts
as a repository where learners can easily store different graphs and data sets they
create during their investigation (see Figure 9). The data log maintains the different
products in the order learners saved them, which helps learners easily organize and
find their work products (scaffolding Strategy 6b).
The idea in Guideline 6 of automatically handling nonsalient, routine tasks rep-
resents perhaps the most straightforward of the three process management guide-
lines. Yet questions about what aspects of tasks should be assisted by technology
are often quite contentious among educators. Educators might argue that students
will not learn to graph if the software generates graphs for them, or they will not
learn algorithms for long division if they use calculators. Sherin et al. (this issue)
discuss the need for being explicit about learning goals in identifying scaffolding.
Arguments for scaffolding entail assumptions about goals—in this context, for
368
QUINTANA ET AL.
FIGURE 9
The Data Log in Galápagos Finches automatically saves all graph queries associ-
ated with the query specification and timestamp.


these learners, is learning the mechanics of graphing the learning objective? Or is
graphing a means to an end with the real goal being to learn data analysis skills?
Eliminating aspects of tasks that are less central to the given learning goals can re-
duce learners’cognitive load and allow them to focus on the more central learning
tasks. The tools we use to illustrate this guideline and its associated strategies,
then, provide examples of some of the ways these less salient tasks can be mini-
mized or eliminated, freeing learners to focus on tasks that directly address learn-
ing objectives.
SCAFFOLDING ARTICULATION AND REFLECTION
We have delineated the scaffolding guidelines and strategies for sense making and
process management. The third constituent of scientific inquiry includes the com-
plementary processes of articulation and reflection. We combine articulation and
reflection because they are mutually supportive processes that are difficult to
disentangle.
The Nature of Articulation and Reflection
The articulation and reflection processes support process management and sense
making as well as the collaboration needed to make inquiry effective. A critical as-
pect of inquiry involves constructing and articulating an argument; this in turn in-
volves reviewing, reflecting on, and evaluating results; synthesizing explanations;
and deciding where the weaknesses and strengths are in one’s thinking (Collins &
Brown, 1988; E. A. Davis, 2004; E. A. Davis & Linn, 2000; Loh et al., 2001).
Reflection and articulation play a key role throughout many instructional ap-
proaches. For example, Linn’s scaffolded knowledge integration framework (Linn,
1995; Linn, Davis, et al., 2004; Linn & Hsi, 2000) highlights the importance of
making thinking visible and promoting autonomous lifelong learning, and reflec-
tion is key in these. Engaging in reflective self-assessment can help students im-
prove their understanding of content and inquiry (White & Frederiksen, 1998). Re-
flective processes help learners proceed with an investigation process, detect when
past decisions should be reconsidered, identify dead ends, and remember to ad-
dress goals (Schoenfeld, 1987). Furthermore, reflecting and articulating intention-
ally and publicly can promote knowledge building at the individual and commu-
nity level (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1991).
Obstacles Learners Face in Articulation and Reflection
Learners, however, face several challenges in articulating and reflecting produc-
tively. First, learners often do not realize that they should articulate their ideas (Linn
SCAFFOLDING DESIGN FRAMEWORK
369


& Songer, 1991; Loh et al., 2001; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1991; van Zee &
Minstrell, 1997). In fact, learners sometimes interpret opportunities for articulation
and reflection as merely being blanks to fill in (E. A. Davis & Linn, 2000; Schauble,
Glaser, Duschl, Schulze, & John, 1995). Furthermore, learners often do not know
how to reflect productively (E. A. Davis, 2003a; Palincsar & Brown, 1984); thus,
they need support to identify good ways to reflect on and articulate their ideas.
A second related challenge is that learners may focus on achieving quick out-
comes (Schauble, Klopfer, & Raghavan, 1991). Learners working collaboratively
do not necessarily identify or reconcile mismatches in group members’ ideas un-
less they are required to reach consensus (Cohen, 1994; Webb, 1983) or commit
explicitly (Bell, 1998; Golan, Kyza, Reiser, & Edelson, 2001; Reiser, this issue).
Third, learners have difficulty in planning and monitoring their investigations.
They forge ahead without considering alternatives or ramifications of their deci-
sions, get bogged down in logistical details of their work (Schauble, Glaser, et al.,
1991), and focus on superficial measures of progress (Lan, 1996; Palincsar &
Brown, 1984; Tien, Rickey, & Stacy, 1999; White & Frederiksen, 1998). Learners
may develop illusions of competence that preclude them from identifying weak-
nesses in their knowledge (E. A. Davis, 2003a). Studies have shown that students
who do not appropriately plan their work and monitor their understanding tend to
not perform as well as students who do (Chi, Bassok, Lewis, Reimann, & Glaser,
1989; Flower & Hayes, 1980; Recker & Pirolli, 1995). Thus, learners need support
for articulating and reflecting as they plan and monitor their investigations
(Bielaczyc, Pirolli, & Brown, 1995; Linn & Songer, 1991).
A fourth challenge for learners in articulating and reflecting stems from the fact
that the form of the articulated epistemic products of science is critical (Collins &
Ferguson,1993).Forexample,claimsneedtobesupportedwithevidence,andargu-
ments need to be warranted (Toulmin, 1958/1964). Descriptions should include ob-
servations but exclude inferences. Explanations should refine or expand on ideas or
infer consequences (Chi & Bassok, 1989), and explanatory arguments should ex-
plore multiple hypotheses, present coherent assertions, provide evidence, and jus-
tify connections between claims and evidence (Sandoval, 2003). However, science
learnershavetroublewithallofthesepractices.Forexample,whenlearnersdescribe
objects and phenomena, they may not notice important details or they may confuse
description and explanation (Bell, 1997; Driver, Leach, Millar, & Scott, 1996;
Gallas,1995;Songer&Linn,1991).Whentheydiscusscausality,learnersmayomit
justifications or reasons (e.g., Bell, 1997; Kuhn, 1993; Sandoval & Reiser, 2004).
Scaffolding Guideline 7: Facilitate Ongoing Articulation and
Reflection During the Investigation
We have identified one scaffolding guideline to address these challenges and sup-
port learners with reflection and articulation. It involves support that encourages
370
QUINTANA ET AL.


students to articulate and reflect on their ideas in ways that are scientifically pro-
ductive. We identified four strategies for implementing this guideline:
7a. Provide reminders and guidance to facilitate productive planning.
7b. Provide reminders and guidance to facilitate productive monitoring.
7c. Provide reminders and guidance to facilitate articulation during sense mak-
ing.
7d. Highlight epistemic features of scientific practices and products.
Scaffolding Strategies 7a and 7b involve providing reminders and guidance to
promote productive planning and monitoring. Linn, Bell, et al. (2004) presented
several design principles associated with promoting articulation and reflection for
planning and monitoring such as including prompts that remind learners of the as-
pects of the project they have yet to complete so they can monitor their progress
and plan accordingly. Our examples supporting planning and monitoring (see
Table 8) range from fairly implicit reminders or guidance, such as the ability to
store records of important findings (e.g., Progress Portfolio; Loh et al., 1998), to
more explicit support, such as directed prompts for planning or monitoring (e.g.,
KIE; E. A. Davis & Linn, 2000).
When learners articulate their ideas, they also need help to make sense of the
science they are learning. As discussed earlier, learners often do not know to—or
simply neglect to—articulate their ideas, or they need help to do so productively.
Scaffolding Strategy 7c addresses these challenges by providing guidance—in-
cluding simple reminders—for articulating ideas to promote sense making.
Typically, the examples here involve providing a mechanism for recording ques-
tions, findings, or ideas during the investigation (see Table 8). For example, the
Progress Portfolio provides mechanisms for learners to document important find-
ings from their investigation (an image from a Web browser, simulation, or data-
base) and to record their thinking on the artifact created (see Figure 10).
In addition to support for planning and monitoring, learners also need guid-
ance and support to understand the epistemic characteristics of the products they
need to create (e.g., explanations, descriptions, interpretations) and the practices
they use to construct these products. This support can help them engage in the
discourse of science (Lemke, 1990) and make sense of science concepts. An im-
portant idea in design theories is making these epistemic assumptions, which are
often tacit in instruction, explicit in the tools and artifacts students use (Linn,
Bell, et al., 2004; Reiser et al., 2001; Sandoval, 2003). The examples of scaffold-
ing Strategy 7d in Table 8 focus on understanding scientific argumentation (Bell
& Linn, 2000; Sandoval, 2003; Sandoval & Reiser, 2004), the process of coordi-
nating theory and evidence, considerations of the utility and relevance of scien-
tific evidence (Linn, Bell, et al., 2004), and distinguishing between observations
and inferences.
SCAFFOLDING DESIGN FRAMEWORK
371


372
TABLE 8
Software Examples of Guideline 7: Facilitate Ongoing Articulation and
Reflection During the Investigation
Software
Description
Scaffolding Strategy 7a: Provide reminders and
guidance to facilitate productive planning
ExplanationConstructor
The ExplanationConstructor asks students to
generate questions that they use to guide their
own investigation (Sandoval, 2003)
Symphony
Symphony includes a planning workspace
where students see a high-level inquiry
process map showing possible activities, and
a planning grid where students can drag and
place activities to incrementally develop an
investigation plan (Quintana, 2001; Quintana
et al., 2002)
Scaffolding Strategy 7b: Provide reminders and
guidance to facilitate productive monitoring
KIE and WISE
KIE and WISE can use “Checking Our
Understanding” prompts as well as other
more generic reflection prompts to encourage
students to monitor their progress and their
understanding (E. A. Davis, 2003a; E. A.
Davis & Linn, 2000)
Geometry Tutor
The Geometry Tutor provides a visual
representation of learners’ reasoning chains as
they work on geometry proofs to help
learners keep track of what goals have been
met and what gaps remain (Anderson, Bayle,
& Yost, 1986)
Scaffolding Strategy 7c: Provide reminders and
guidance to facilitate articulation during sense
making
Progress Portfolio
The Progress Portfolio contains prompted text
fields and a sticky note tool to enable students
to annotate their findings, thus supporting
sense making by encouraging them to
annotate the artifacts they create with their
understanding or interpretation (without
providing guidance to direct the sense
making; Loh et al., 1998)
CSILE/Knowledge Forum
Knowledge Forum promotes sense making by
giving students different opportunities to
articulate their ideas with contributions to a
communal database of notes that support
community knowledge growth (Scardamalia
& Bereiter, 1991)


We expand on an example of this final strategy and this guideline more gener-
ally. Through their use of ExplanationConstructor, students are able to produc-
tively articulate and reflect on their ideas (Sandoval & Reiser, 2004). First, the
ExplanationConstructor asks students to generate questions and subquestions that
they use to guide their own investigation (Sandoval, 2003). This helps them plan
(scaffolding
Strategy
7a).
Furthermore,
guiding
questions
in
the
ExplanationConstructor make explicit the important components of scientific ex-
planations for the particular discipline, and the structure of the artifact students
create makes explicit the core epistemic features of an explanatory argument, ad-
dressing scaffolding Strategy 7d (see Figure 11). Students create an explanation
that contains embedded evidence (attached to each claim) and is created in a win-
dow that contains the relevant guiding questions for the discipline. Explanations
are connected to questions students articulate, and these questions can contain two
or more alternative explanations, suggesting the importance of discriminating al-
ternative hypotheses.
The examples we have selected to illustrate Guideline 7, including the previous
ExplanationConstructor example, address the obstacles learners face in reflecting
on and articulating their ideas productively. The tools variously remind learners to
plan investigations, monitor progress, or make sense of ideas. They provide guid-
ance about how to do so productively. Finally, they help them do so in ways that are
true to the demands of the discipline. By supplementing the learners’ own
metacognition and by helping learners use epistemically appropriate practices and
SCAFFOLDING DESIGN FRAMEWORK
373
SMILE
SMILE has a “Pin-Up Tool” with prompted text
fields that remind learners to justify their
features for a design project and connect them
to scientific principles (Kolodner, Owensby,
& Guzdial, 2004)
Scaffolding Strategy 7d: Highlight epistemic
features of scientific practices and products
ExplanationConstructor
Guiding questions in the
ExplanationConstructor make explicit the
important components of scientific
explanations for the particular discipline
(Sandoval & Reiser, 2004)
Animal Landlord
Animal Landlord uses a video frame capture
tool and ethogram menu that requires
differentiation between observation and
inference to help students distinguish between
observations and inferences in their scientific
descriptions (B. K. Smith & Reiser, 1998)
Note.
KIE = Knowledge Integration Environment; WISE = Web-Based Inquiry Science Environ-
ment; CSILE = Computer-Supported Intentional Learning Environment; SMILE = Supportive
Multiuser Interactive Learning Environment.


products, the scaffolding approaches we have outlined here help learners engage in
more productive cognitive activities.
DISCUSSION
Our goal in this article was to argue the need for a scaffolding design framework to
provide a common theoretical framework that defines rationales and approaches
for how software tools can scaffold learners. We provide an initial proposal for
374
QUINTANA ET AL.
FIGURE 10
The Progress Portfolio enables students to create a record of their thinking at-
tached to the artifacts they create in an investigation. Here the students have captured data and
use sticky notes to articulate their interpretations.


such a framework in the domain of science inquiry to provide a theory of pedagogi-
cal support and a mechanism that describes successful scaffolding approaches
with respect to the obstacles learners face in science inquiry. In this section, we dis-
cuss the utility of the framework and consider its scope.
The Utility of the Framework
With this framework, we intend to synthesize the wisdom drawn from the research
literature and the field of practice to characterize principled approaches for sup-
porting learners using software as they engage in scientific inquiry. If this frame-
work is successful, it will be useful for the field along several dimensions.
First, the framework provides a basis to develop an integrated theory of pedagogi-
cal support for complex learning with software. Our perspective is that scaffolding re-
searchers and designers need to synthesize theoretical claims across different design
research efforts. Abstracting from the specifics of design ideas and the experiences
with their enactment is a critical aspect of design research (Edelson, 2002). A common
framework in which to characterize and motivate design is one mechanism that would
allow design research to be more of a community knowledge-building enterprise.
SCAFFOLDING DESIGN FRAMEWORK
375
FIGURE 11
ExplanationConstructor contains guiding questions that provide discipline-spe-
cific support on the necessary constituents of an explanation from a target theoretical frame-
work.


Second, the framework provides a mechanism to guide the construction of an
empirical knowledge base about successful design approaches for scaffolding. De-
veloping general principles, abstracted from particular implementations and par-
ticular research projects but grounded in identified learning obstacles, will allow
researchers to frame hypotheses about what pedagogical approaches are effective
in supporting learners.
We consider the need for and potential utility of such a framework through an
example. A basic research goal in a set of studies might be an investigation of
whether prompting students during their investigations could support learning.
With the scaffolding design framework, one could probe such a research question
at a deeper level by explicitly uncovering important distinctions. For example, one
distinction is that prompts for reflection are intended to promote quite different
kinds of outcomes than prompts for explanations, and indeed, different prompts
can work to produce different outcomes (E. A. Davis & Linn, 2000; E. A. Davis,
2003a). Application of the scaffolding design framework can lead to a more de-
tailed set of empirical predictions, providing a common language to distinguish
between approaches and a mechanism for making more nuanced analyses. Our
framework characterizes the distinctions that we expect to matter both in the intent
and the expected outcomes of scaffolding approaches. By tying interface elements
such as prompts to a substantive analysis of the nature of the task at hand (i.e., re-
flection tasks vs. explanation tasks), we improve the utility of the analysis.
A third use of the framework is for guiding design. Designers of educational
software can review existing or candidate designs and identify scaffolding ap-
proaches that may be appropriate to incorporate. The framework is intended to pro-
vide guidance in the form of design heuristics, not specific prescriptions. It pro-
vides guidance about what learning challenges are important to address and
provides candidates, through the guidelines and strategies, for approaches to ad-
dress those challenges. However, the framework cannot tell a designer which spe-
cific strategy to select for which context. Specific design decisions must be based
on the kinds of task and obstacle analyses we have described here.
Scope and Comprehensiveness of the Framework
We have illustrated the utility of the framework, and next we address its scope. A
first question to consider is the completeness of the analysis. We have synthesized
a broad array of theoretical and empirical literature on science learning and the ob-
stacles that arise for learners engaging in science practices to develop a framework
that organizes software scaffolding guidelines around those science tasks and ob-
stacles. We have considered a broad range of more than two dozen software tools,
many of which are represented in the examples in this article. We present this
framework, however, as an initial proposal to facilitate research on software scaf-
376
QUINTANA ET AL.


folds in science. Its comprehensiveness needs to be tested, leading to extensions
and adaptations of the framework to encompass a broader diversity of design ideas.
While attempting to be thorough, we have also bounded our analyses. First, we
have focused on the core processes of inquiry, mainly from the perspective of
working with data and constructing explanations. In these aspects of the problem
solving, we suggest the analysis of inquiry in the framework represents the central
themes of a sense-making view of inquiry in the literature. Correspondingly, we
suggest the scaffolding guidelines are relatively comprehensive in responding to
the obstacles that have been identified in prior research and in characterizing the
software scaffolding design approaches represented in the literature. However, we
chose to focus on what we viewed as the central and most discipline-specific of
scientific practice (i.e., sense making being supported by process management, ar-
ticulation, and reflection), and we have not dealt in our framework with some of
the broader issues of scientific practice in which these core processes are embed-
ded. For example, one could focus on the problems inherent in collaboration be-
tween learners, or in communication between teachers and students, or in
whole-class presentation and discussion. Certainly, some of our guidelines and
strategies do touch on collaboration when the collaboration is around scientific
practices such as jointly constructed explanations. However, the framework does
not include a systematic analysis of general approaches for supporting collabora-
tive work. Many excellent examples of scaffolds for collaboration exist, such as
those in the “launcher” projects in “Learning by Design” (Holbrook & Kolodner,
2000; Kolodner et al., 2003) or Hoadley’s (1999) socially relevant representations.
These, however, are beyond the scope of this article.
Another aspect of practice not addressed relates to scaffolding students’ data
collection. Although we see this as an important aspect of sense making, most of
the empirical work that has been done in science software has focused on what
happens once the data has already been collected (with a few notable exceptions,
such as Linn & Songer, 1991). Thus, our framework may not adequately address
scaffolding approaches for data collection.
Furthermore, although we argue that our scaffolding guidelines represent a
synthesis of current approaches, the scaffolding strategies addressing those
guidelines are not intended to be comprehensive. As designed responses to
learning challenges, we would expect future design work to uncover new types
of scaffolding strategies that can achieve these guidelines. The software strate-
gies presented in this framework are meant to capture and situate current design
approaches in a coherent theoretical framework rather than be a comprehensive
set of possible strategies.
A final way we have bounded our investigations is that we have considered only
scaffolding embedded within software. Other kinds of scaffolding are critical—for
example, teachers, peers, and curriculum materials all play extremely important
roles in the ways students learn science. Tabak (this issue) provides an extensive
SCAFFOLDING DESIGN FRAMEWORK
377


discussion of the synergies that exist between software scaffolding and other deliv-
ery mechanisms.
Another question to pose concerns the generality of our framework. As we have
noted, we limit our claims to supporting science inquiry with software tools. Our
analyses proceeded with an analysis of the challenges of this particular discipline,
and our examples were primarily drawn from tools that support science or from re-
latedeffortstosupportmathematics.Someoftheprinciplesintheframeworkmaybe
argued to have generality beyond the discipline of science. Testing the generality of
the scaffolding design framework is an important ongoing research agenda—as is
testing the generality of any design principle or set of design principles.
In closing, we have argued the need for a synthesis of both craft knowledge,
drawn from design efforts, and theoretical accounts of scaffolding, drawn from de-
sign and empirical research. We can look back to the initial descriptions of soft-
ware-realized scaffolding (Guzdial, 1994; Soloway et al., 1994), which were in-
strumental in defining how software can instantiate scaffolding approaches to
support learners and characterizing the construct of scaffolding with respect to
software. Our work here expands on that view of scaffolding as well as the per-
spectives presented elsewhere in this issue (Reiser, this issue; Sherin et al., this is-
sue; Tabak, this issue) to articulate a set of scaffolding guidelines and strategies
gleaned from theory and practice. We have presented an initial scaffolding design
framework constructed in a rich terrain of learning opportunities and challenges.
The framework has been successful in accounting for a broad range of software
types and styles of interaction. It presents candidate principles to account for how
software tools can transform tasks within science inquiry to make them more trac-
table and productive for learning. We hope that the framework can serve as a
springboard for the research community to explore a range of scaffolding issues
and approaches.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
An earlier version of this article was presented at the October 2002 International
Conference of the Learning Sciences. This research was conducted as part of the
KDI/ASSESS project and the Center for Learning Technologies in Urban Schools,
supported, in part, by National Science Foundations Grants REC–9980055 and
REC–972038, respectively. The opinions expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the National Science Foundation. All of the authors
were involved in conceptualizing the work presented here. The writing was done
by Chris Quintana, Brian J. Reiser, and Elizabeth A. Davis, with significant input
from Joseph Krajcik.
We thank all of the researchers involved with the ASSESS project for their work
and feedback, especially Laura Barden-Gabbei, Barbara Crawford, Andrew
378
QUINTANA ET AL.


Lumpe, Cathleen Norris, and Carla Zembal-Saul. We also thank Janet Kolodner,
Naomi Miyake, and our anonymous reviewers for their comments and sugges-
tions. Finally, we thank all the members of our research groups for their helpful
comments on the article.
REFERENCES
Anderson, J. R. (1983). The architecture of cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Anderson, J. R., Boyle, C. F., & Reiser, B. J. (1985). Intelligent tutoring systems. Science, 228,
456–462.
Anderson,J.R.,Boyle,C.F.,&Yost,G.(1986).Thegeometrytutor.JournalofMathematicalBehavior,5,5–19.
Anderson, J. R., Corbett, A. T., Koedinger, K. R., & Pelletier, R. (1995). Cognitive tutors: Lessons
learned. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 4, 167–207.
Bell, P. (1997). Using argument representations to make thinking visible. In R. Hall, N. Miyake, & N.
Enyedy (Eds.), Proceedings of CSCL ‘97: The Second International Conference on Computer Sup-
port for Collaborative Learning (pp. 10–19). Toronto, Ontario, Canada: University of Toronto Press.
Bell, P. (1998). Supporting conceptual change in the science classroom through technology-enhanced
instruction involving evidence and argument. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Cali-
fornia at Berkeley.
Bell, P., & Davis, E. A. (2000). Designing Mildred: Scaffolding students’reflection and argumentation
using a cognitive software guide. In B. Fishman & S. O’Connor-Divelbiss (Eds.), Proceedings of
ICLS 2000: International Conference for the Learning Sciences (pp. 142–149). Mahwah, NJ: Law-
rence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Bell, P., Davis, E. A., & Linn, M. C. (1995). The knowledge integration environment: Theory and de-
sign. In J. L. Schnase & E. L. Cunnius (Eds.), Proceedings of the CSCL Conference ‘95 (pp. 14–21).
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Bell, P., & Linn, M. C. (2000). Scientific arguments as learning artifacts: Designing for learning from
the web with KIE. International Journal of Science Education, 22, 797–817.
Bellamy, R. K. E. (1996). Designing educational technology: Computer-mediated change. In B. A.
Nardi (Ed.), Context and consciousness: Activity theory and human–computer interaction (pp.
123–146). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bielaczyc, K., & Collins, A. (1999). Learning communities in classrooms: A reconceptualization of ed-
ucational practice. In C. M. Reigeluth (Ed.), Instructional-design theories and models: A new para-
digm of instructional theory (pp. 269–292). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Bielaczyc, K., Pirolli, P. L., & Brown, A. L. (1995). Training in self-explanation and self-regulation
strategies: Investigating the effects of knowledge acquisition activities on problem solving. Cogni-
tion and Instruction, 13, 221–252.
Blumenfeld, P. C., Fishman, B., Krajcik, J., Marx, R. W., & Soloway, E. (2000). Creating usable inno-
vations in systemic reform: Scaling up technology-embedded project-based science in urban
schools. Educational Psychologist, 35, 149–164.
Blumenfeld, P. C., Soloway, E., Marx, R. W., Krajcik, J. S., Guzdial, M., & Palincsar, A. (1991). Moti-
vating project-based learning: Sustaining the doing, supporting the learning. Educational Psycholo-
gist, 26, 369–398.
Bransford, J. D., Brown, A. L., & Cocking, R. R. (Eds.). (2000). How people learn: Brain, mind, expe-
rience, and school (expanded ed.). Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Brown, A. L., & Campione, J. C. (1994). Guided discovery in a community of learners. In K. McGilly
(Ed.), Classroom lessons: Integrating cognitive theory and classroom practice (pp. 229–270). Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press/Bradford Books.
SCAFFOLDING DESIGN FRAMEWORK
379


Bruner, J. (1996). The culture of education. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Carroll, J. M., & Carrithers, C. (1984, August). Training wheels in a user interface. Communications of
the ACM, 27, 800–806.
Center for Innovative Learning Technologies. (2002). Design principles for educational software. Re-
trieved April, 2002, from http://wise.berkeley.edu/design
Chase, W. G., & Simon, H. A. (1974). Perception in chess. Cognitive Psychology, 4, 55–81.
Chi, M., & Bassok, M. (1989). Learning from examples via self-explanations. In L. B. Resnick (Ed.),
Knowing, learning, and instruction: Essays in honor of Robert Glaser (pp. 251–282). Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Chi, M., Bassok, M., Lewis, M. W., Reimann, P., & Glaser, R. (1989). Self-explanations: How students
study and use examples in learning to solve problems. Cognitive Science, 13, 145–182.
Chi, M., Feltovich, P., & Glaser, R. (1981). Categorization and representation of physics problems by
experts and novices. Cognitive Science, 5, 121–152.
Clement, J. (1993). Using bridging analogies and anchoring intuitions to deal with students’preconcep-
tions in physics. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 30, 1241–1257.
Cohen, E. G. (1994). Restructuring the classroom: Conditions for productive small groups. Review of
Educational Research, 64, 1–35.
Collins, A. (1996). Design issues for learning environments. In S. Vosniadou, E. D. Corte, R. Glaser, &
H. Mandl (Eds.), International perspectives on the design of technology-supported learning environ-
ments (pp. 347–362). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Collins, A., & Brown, J. S. (1988). The computer as a tool for learning through reflection. In H. Mandl
& A. M. Lesgold (Eds.), Learning issues for intelligent tutoring systems (pp. 1–18). Chicago:
Springer-Verlag.
Collins, A., Brown, J. S., & Newman, S. E. (1989a). Cognitive apprenticeship: Teaching the craft of
reading, writing, and mathematics. In L. B. Resnick (Ed.), Cognition and instruction: Issues and
agendas (pp. 453–494). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Collins, A., Brown, J. S., & Newman, S. E. (1989b). Cognitive apprenticeship: Teaching the crafts of
reading, writing, and mathematics. In L. B. Resnick (Ed.), Knowing, learning, and instruction: Es-
says in honor of Robert Glaser (pp. 453–494). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Collins, A., & Ferguson, W. (1993). Epistemic forms and epistemic games: Structures and strategies to
guide inquiry. Educational Psychologist, 28, 25–42.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1991). Flow: The psychology of optimal experience. New York: HarperPerennial.
Davis, E. A. (2003a). Prompting middle school science students for productive reflection: Generic and
directed prompts. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12, 91–142.
Davis, E. A. (2003b). Untangling dimensions of students’ beliefs about scientific knowledge and sci-
ence learning. International Journal of Science Education, 25, 439–468.
Davis, E. A. (2004). Creating critique projects. In M. C. Linn, E. A. Davis, & P. Bell (Eds.), Internet en-
vironments for science education (pp. 89–113). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Davis, E. A., & Bell, P. (2001, April). Design principles for scaffolding students’reflection and argu-
mentation in science. Paper presented at the American Educational Research Association confer-
ence, Seattle, WA.
Davis, E. A., & Linn, M. C. (2000). Scaffolding students’knowledge integration: Prompts for reflection
in KIE. International Journal of Science Education, 22, 819–837.
Davis, M., Hawley, P., McMullan, B., & Spilka, G. (1997). Design as a catalyst for learning. Alexan-
dria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development.
Dimitrov, D. M., McGee, S., & Howard, B. C. (2002). Changes in students’science ability produced by
multimedia learning environments: Application of the linear logistic model for change. School Sci-
ence and Mathematics, 102, 15–24.
Driver, R., Leach, J., Millar, R., & Scott, P. (1996). Young people’s images of science. Buckingham,
England: Open University Press.
380
QUINTANA ET AL.


Edelson, D. C. (2001). Learning-for-use: A framework for integrating content and process learning in
the design of inquiry activities. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 38, 355–385.
Edelson, D. C. (2002). Design research: What we learn when we engage in design. The Journal of the
Learning Sciences, 11, 105–121.
Edelson, D. C., Gordin, D., & Pea, R. (1999). Addressing the challenges of inquiry-based learning
through technology and curriculum design. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 8, 391–450.
Favorin, M., & Kuutti, K. (1996). Supporting learning at work by making work activities visible
through information technology. Machine-Mediated Learning, 5, 109–118.
Flower, L. S., & Hayes, J. R. (1980). The dynamics of composing: Making plans and juggling con-
straints. In L. W. Gregg & E. R. Steinberg (Eds.), Cognitive processes in writing (pp. 31–49).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Gallas, K. (1995). Talking their way into science. New York: Teachers College Press.
Golan, R., Kyza, E. A., Reiser, B. J., & Edelson, D. C. (2001, March). Structuring the task of behavioral
analysis with software scaffolds. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Association
of Research in Science Teaching, St. Louis, MO.
Greeno, J. G. (1989). Situations, mental models, and generative knowledge. In D. Klahr & K. Kotovsky
(Eds.), Complex information processing: The impact of Herbert A. Simon (pp. 285–318). Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Guzdial, M. (1994). Software-realized scaffolding to facilitate programming for science learning. In-
teractive Learning Environments, 4, 1–44.
Hancock, C., Kaput, J. J., & Goldsmith, L. T. (1992). Authentic inquiry with data: Critical barriers to
classroom implementation. Educational Psychologist, 27, 337–364.
Hannafin, M. J., Land, S., & Oliver, K. (1999). Open learning environments: Foundations, methods,
and models. In C. M. Reigeluth (Ed.), Instructional design theories and models (Vol. 2, pp.
115–140). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Hoadley, C. M. (1999). Scaffolding scientific discussion using socially relevant representations in net-
worked multimedia. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of California at Berkeley.
Holbrook, J., & Kolodner, J. L. (2000). Scaffolding the development of an inquiry-based (science) class-
room. In B. Fishman & S. O’Connor-Divelbiss (Eds.), Proceedings of ICLS 2000: International Con-
ference of the Learning Sciences (pp. 221–227). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Hollan, J. D., Hutchins, E. L., & Weitzman, L. (1984). STEAMER: An interactive inspectable simula-
tion-based training system. The AI Magazine, 5(2), 15–27.
Horwitz, P. (1996). Linking models to data: Hypermodels for science education. The High School Jour-
nal, 79, 148–156.
Jackiw, N. (1995). The Geometer’s Sketchpad™[Computer software]. Emeryville, CA: Key Curricu-
lum Press.
Jackson, S. L., Stratford, S. J., Krajcik, J., & Soloway, E. (1994). Making dynamic modeling accessible
to precollege science students. Interactive Learning Environments, 4, 233–257.
Jacobson, M. J., Sugimoto, A., & Archodidou, A. (1996). Evolution, hypermedia learning environ-
ments, and conceptual change: A preliminary report. In D. C. Edelson & E. A. Domeshek (Eds.),
Proceedings of ICLS 1996: International Conference on the Learning Sciences (pp. 151–158). Char-
lottesville, VA: Association for the Advancement of Computing in Education.
Klahr, D. (2000). Exploring science: The cognition and development of discovery processes. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Klahr, D., & Dunbar, K. (1988). Dual space search during scientific reasoning. Cognitive Science, 12, 1–48.
Knapp, L. K. (1994). A task analysis approach to the visualization of geographic data. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, University of Colorado at Boulder.
Knorr-Cetina, K. (1996). The care of the self and blind variation: An ethnography of the empirical in
two sciences. In P. Galison & D. J. Stump (Eds.), The disunity of science: Boundaries, contexts, and
power (pp. 287–310). Stanford: Stanford University Press.
SCAFFOLDING DESIGN FRAMEWORK
381


Kolodner, J. L., Camp, P. J., Crismond, D., Fasse, B., Gray, J., Holbrook, J., et al. (2003). Prob-
lem-based learning meets case-based reasoning in the middle-school science classroom: Putting
learning by design into practice. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12, 495–548.
Kolodner, J. L., Owensby, J. N., & Guzdial, M. (2004). Case-based learning aids. In D. H. Jonassen
(Ed.), Handbook of research on educational communications and technology (2nd ed., pp. 829–862).
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Kozma, R. B., Russell, J., Jones, T., Marx, N., & Davis, J. (1996). The use of multiple, linked represen-
tations to facilitate science understanding. In S. Vosniadou, E. DeCorte, & H. Mandel (Eds.), Inter-
national perspective on the psychological foundations of technology-based learning environments
(pp. 41–60). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Krajcik, J., Berger, C. F., & Czerniak, C. M. (2002). Teaching science in elementary and middle school
classrooms: A project-based approach (2nd ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Krajcik, J., Blumenfeld, P., Marx, R., Bass, K. M., Fredericks, J., & Soloway, E. (1998). Middle school
students’initial attempts at inquiry in project-based science classrooms. The Journal of the Learning
Sciences, 7, 313–350.
Kress, G., & van Leeuwen, T. (1996). Reading images: The grammar of visual design. London, Eng-
land: Routledge.
Kuhn, D. (1993). Science as argument: Implications for teaching and learning scientific thinking. Sci-
ence Education, 77, 319–337.
Lan, W. (1996). The effects of self-monitoring on students’course performance, use of learning strate-
gies, attitude, self-judgment ability, and knowledge representation. Journal of Experimental Educa-
tion, 64, 101–115.
Larkin, J. H., McDermott, J., Simon, D., & Simon, H. A. (1980). Models of competence in solving
physics problems. Cognitive Science, 4, 317–345.
Latour, B. (1990). Drawing things together. In M. Lynch & S. Woolgar (Eds.), Representation in scien-
tific practice (pp. 19–68). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Lehrer, R., & Schauble, L. (Eds.). (2002). Investigating real data in the classroom: Expanding chil-
dren’s understanding of math and science. New York: Teachers College Press.
Lemke, J. L. (1990). Talking science : Language, learning, and values. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Lesgold, A., Lajoie, S., Bunzo, M., & Eggan, G. (1992). SHERLOCK: A coached practice environment
for an electronics troubleshooting job. In J. H. Larkin & R. W. Chabay (Eds.), Computer assisted in-
struction and intelligent tutoring systems: Shared goals and complementary approaches (pp.
201–238). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Linn, M. C. (1995). Designing computer learning environments for engineering and computer science: The
scaffolded knowledge integration framework. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 4, 103–126.
Linn, M. C. (2000). Designing the Knowledge Integration Environment. International Journal of Sci-
ence Education, 22, 781–796.
Linn, M. C., Bell, P., & Davis, E. A. (2004). Specific design principles: Elaborating the scaffolded
knowledge integration framework. In M. C. Linn, E. A. Davis, & P. Bell (Eds.), Internet environ-
ments for science education (pp. 315–339). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Linn, M. C., Davis, E. A., & Eylon, B.-S. (2004). The scaffolded knowledge integration framework for
instruction. In M. C. Linn, E. A. Davis, & P. Bell (Eds.), Internet environments for science education
(pp. 47–72). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Linn, M. C., & Hsi, S. (2000). Computers, teachers, peers: Science learning partners. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Linn, M. C., & Slotta, J. D. (2000). WISE science. Educational Leadership, 58(2), 29–32.
Linn, M. C., & Songer, N. B. (1991). Teaching thermodynamics to middle school students: What are
appropriate cognitive demands? Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 28, 885–918.
382
QUINTANA ET AL.


Loh, B., Radinsky, J., Russell, E., Gomez, L. M., Reiser, B. J., & Edelson, D. C. (1998). The Progress
Portfolio: Designing reflective tools for a classroom context. In C. Karat, A. Lund, J. Coutaz, & J.
Karat (Eds.), Proceedings of CHI 98 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp.
627–634). Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Loh, B., Reiser, B. J., Radinsky, J., Edelson, D. C., Gomez, L. M., & Marshall, S. (2001). Developing
reflective inquiry practices: A case study of software, the teacher, and students. In K. Crowley, C. D.
Schunn, & T. Okada (Eds.), Designing for science: Implications from everyday, classroom, and pro-
fessional settings (pp. 279–323). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Merrill, D. C., Reiser, B. J., Ranney, M., & Trafton, J. G. (1992). Effective tutoring techniques: A com-
parison of human tutors and intelligent tutoring systems. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2,
277–306.
Metcalf, S. J., Krajcik, J., & Soloway, E. (2000). Model-It: A design retrospective. In M. J. Jacobson &
R. B. Kozma (Eds.), Innovations in science and mathematics education (pp. 77–115). Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Minstrell, J., & Van Zee, E. (Eds.). (2000). Inquiring into inquiry learning and teaching in science.
Washington, DC: American Association for the Advancement of Science.
Miyata, Y., & Norman, D. A. (1986). Psychological issues in support of multiple activities. In D. A.
Norman & S. W. Draper (Eds.), User centered system design (pp. 265–284). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
National Research Council. (1996). National science education standards. Washington, DC: Author.
Nemirovsky, R., Tierney, C., & Wright, T. (1998). Body motion and graphing. Cognition and Instruc-
tion, 16, 119–172.
Newell, A., & Simon, H. A. (1972). Human problem solving. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Norman, D. A. (1991). Cognitive artifacts. In J. M. Carroll (Ed.), Designing interaction: Psychology at
the human–computer interface (pp. 17–38). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Palincsar, A. S. (1998). Keeping the metaphor of scaffolding fresh—A response to C. Addison Stone’s
“The metaphor of scaffolding: Its utility for the field of learning disabilities.” Journal of Learning
Disabilities, 31, 370–373.
Palincsar, A. S., & Brown, A. L. (1984). Reciprocal teaching of comprehension-fostering and compre-
hension-monitoring activities. Cognition and Instruction, 1, 117–175.
Parr, C. S., Jones, T., & Songer, N. B. (2002). CyberTracker in BioKIDS: Customization of a
PDA-based scientific data collection application for inquiry learning. In P. Bell, R. Stevens, & T.
Satwicz (Eds.), Keeping learning complex: The Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference of
the Learning Sciences.
Polman, J. L. (2000). Designing project-based science: Connecting learners through guided inquiry.
New York: Teachers College Press.
Quintana, C. (2001). Symphony: A case study for exploring and describing design methods and guidelines
for learner-centered design. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Quintana, C., Eng, J., Carra, A., Wu, H., & Soloway, E. (1999). Symphony: A case study in extending
learner-centered design through process-space analysis. Proceedings of CHI 99 Conference on Hu-
man Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 473–480). Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Quintana, C., Krajcik, J., & Soloway, E. (2001). Exploring a description and methodology for
learner-centered design. In W. Heineke & L. Blasi (Eds.), Methods of evaluating educational tech-
nology (Vol. 1, pp. 125–146). Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing.
Quintana, C., Krajcik, J., & Soloway, E. (2002, April). Scaffolding design guidelines for learner-cen-
tered software environments. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Re-
search Association, New Orleans, LA.
Quintana, C., Reiser, B., Davis, E. A., Krajcik, J., Golan, R., Kyza, E., et al. (2002). Evolving a scaffolding de-
sign framework for designing educational software. In P. Bell, R. Stevens, & T. Satwicz (Eds.), Keeping
learning complex: The Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference of the Learning Sciences.
SCAFFOLDING DESIGN FRAMEWORK
383


Quintana, C., Soloway, E., & Krajcik, J. (2003). Issues and approaches for developing learner-centered tech-
nology. In M. Zelkowitz (Ed.), Advances in computers (Vol. 57, pp. 271–321). New York: Academic.
Recker, M., & Pirolli, P. (1995). Modeling individual differences in students’ learning strategies. The
Journal of the Learning Sciences, 4, 1–38.
Reif, F., & Larkin, J. H. (1991). Cognition in scientific and everyday domains: Comparison and learn-
ing implications. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 28, 733–760.
Reif, F., & Scott, L. A. (1999). Teaching scientific thinking skills: Students and computers coaching
each other. American Journal of Physics, 67, 819–831.
Reiser, B. J., Tabak, I., Sandoval, W. A., Smith, B. K., Steinmuller, F., & Leone, A. J. (2001). BGuILE:
Strategic and conceptual scaffolds for scientific inquiry in biology classrooms. In S. M. Carver & D.
Klahr (Eds.), Cognition and instruction: Twenty-five years of progress (pp. 263–305). Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Roschelle, J., Kaput, J. J., & Stroup, W. (2000). SimCalc: Accelerating students’ engagement with the
mathematics of change. In M. J. Jacobson & R. Kozma (Eds.), Innovations in science and mathemat-
ics education: Advanced designs for technologies of learning (pp. 47–76). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Rosson, M. B., Carroll, J. M., & Bellamy, R. K. E. (1990). Smalltalk scaffolding: A case study of mini-
malist instruction. In J. C. Chew & J. Whiteside (Eds.), Proceedings of CHI 90 Conference on Hu-
man Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 423–430). New York: ACM.
Ruopp, R., Gal, S., Drayton, B., & Pfister, M. (1993). LabNet: Toward a community of practice.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Salomon, G. (1996). Studying novel learning environments as patterns of change. In S. Vosniadou, E.
DeCorte, R. Glaser, & H. Mandl (Eds.), International perspectives on the design of technology-
supported learning environments (pp. 363–377). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Sandoval, W. A. (2003). Students’ understanding of causal explanation and natural selection in a tech-
nology-supported inquiry curriculum. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 12, 5–51.
Sandoval, W. A., & Reiser, B. J. (2004). Explanation-driven inquiry: Integrating conceptual and
epistemic supports for scientific inquiry. Science Education, 88, 345–372.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1991). Higher levels of agency for children in knowledge building: A
challenge for the design of new knowledge media. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 1, 37–68.
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1992). An architecture for collaborative knowledge building. In E. De
Corte, M. C. Linn, H. Mandl, & L. Verschaffel (Eds.), Computer-based learning environments and
problem solving (pp. 41–66). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Schank, R. C., & Cleary, C. (1995). Engines for education. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associ-
ates, Inc.
Schauble, L., Glaser, R., Duschl, R., Schulze, S., & John, J. (1995). Students’understanding of the ob-
jectives and procedures of experimentation in the science classroom. The Journal of the Learning
Sciences, 4, 131–166.
Schauble, L., Glaser, R., Raghavan, K., & Reiner, M. (1991). Causal models and experimentation strat-
egies in scientific reasoning. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 1, 201–238.
Schauble, L., Klopfer, L., & Raghavan, K. (1991). Students’transition from an engineering model to a
science model of experimentation. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 28, 859–882.
Schoenfeld, A. H. (1987). What’s all the fuss about metacognition? In A. H. Schoenfeld (Ed.), Cogni-
tive science and mathematics education (pp. 189–215). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associ-
ates, Inc.
Sherin, B. (2001). How students understand physics equations. Cognition and Instruction, 19, 479–541.
Shute, V., Glaser, R., & Raghavan, K. (1989). Inference and discovery in an exploratory laboratory. In P.
L. Ackerman, R. J. Sternberg, & R. Glaser (Eds.), Learning and individual differences: advances in
theory and research (pp. 279–326). New York: Freeman.
Simon, H. A. (1973). The structure of ill-structured problems. Artificial Intelligence, 4, 181–202.
384
QUINTANA ET AL.


Smith, B. K., & Reiser, B. J. (1998). National Geographic unplugged: Classroom-centered design of in-
teractive nature films. In C. Karat, A. Lund, J. Coutaz, & J. Karat (Eds.), Proceedings of CHI 98 Con-
ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 424–431). Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Smith, C., & Unger, C. (1997). What’s in dots-per-box? Conceptual bootstrapping with stripped-down
visual analogs. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 6, 143–181.
Snir, J., Smith, C., & Grosslight, L. (1995). Conceptually enhanced simulations: A computer tool for
science teaching. In D. N. Perkins, J. L. Schwartz, M. M. West, & M. S. Wiske (Eds.), Software goes
to school: Teaching for understanding with new technologies (pp. 106–129). New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Soloway, E., Guzdial, M., & Hay, K. E. (1994). Learner-centered design: The challenge for HCI in the
21st century. Interactions, 1, 36–48.
Songer, N. B., & Linn, M. C. (1991). How do students’ views of science influence knowledge integra-
tion? Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 28, 761–784.
Springmeyer, R. R., Blattner, M. M., & Max, N. L. (1992). A characterization of the scientific data anal-
ysis process. In A. E. Kaufman & G. M. Nielson (Eds.), Proceedings of IEEE Visualization ‘92 (pp.
235–242). Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society Press.
Stone, C. A. (1998). The metaphor of scaffolding: Its utility for the field of learning disabilities. Journal
of Learning Disabilities, 31, 344–364.
Stratford, S. J., Krajcik, J., & Soloway, E. (1998). Secondary students’ dynamic modeling processes:
Analyzing, reasoning about, synthesizing, and testing models of stream ecosystems. Journal of Sci-
ence Education and Technology, 7, 215–234.
Strike, K. A., & Posner, G. J. (1985). A conceptual change view of learning and understanding. In L. H.
T. West & A. L. Pines (Eds.), Cognitive structure and conceptual change (pp. 211–231). Orlando,
FL: Academic.
Tabak, I. (1999). Unraveling the development of scientific literacy: Domain-specific inquiry support in
a system of cognitive and social interactions. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Northwestern Uni-
versity, Evanston, IL.
Tabak, I., Smith, B. K., Sandoval, W. A., & Agganis, A. (1996, April). BGuILE: Supporting inquiry in a
learning environment for biology. Paper presented at the 1996 annual meeting of the American Edu-
cational Research Association, New York.
Tabak, I., Smith, B. K., Sandoval, W. A., & Reiser, B. J. (1996). Combining general and domain-spe-
cific strategic support for biological inquiry. In C. Frasson, G. Gauthier, & A. Lesgold (Eds.), Intelli-
gent tutoring systems: Third International Conference, ITS ‘96 (pp. 288–296). Montreal, Quebec,
Canada: Springer-Verlag.
Tien, L., Rickey, D., & Stacy, A. (1999). The MORE cycle: Guiding students’thinking in the laboratory.
Journal of College Science Teaching, 18(5), 318–324.
Toth, E. E., Suthers, D. D., & Lesgold, A. M. (2002). “Mapping to know”: The effects of representa-
tional guidance and reflective assessment on scientific inquiry. Science Education, 86, 264–286.
Toulmin, S. E. (1964). The uses of argument. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. (Orig-
inal work published 1958)
VanLehn, K. (1989). Problem solving and cognitive skill acquisition. In M. Posner (Ed.), Foundations
of cognitive science (pp. 527–580). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
VanLehn, K., Jordan, P. W., Rose, C. P., Bhembe, D., Boettner, M., Gaydos, A., et al. (2002). The archi-
tecture of Why2-Atlas: A coach for qualitative physics essay writing. In S. A. Cerri, G. Gouardènes,
& F. Paraguaçu (Eds.), Intelligent Tutoring Systems: Proceedings of the 6th International Confer-
ence on Intelligent Tutoring Systems (pp. 158–167). Berlin: Springer.
van Zee, E., & Minstrell, J. (1997). Reflective discourse: Developing shared understandings in a phys-
ics classroom. International Journal of Science Education, 19, 209–228.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
SCAFFOLDING DESIGN FRAMEWORK
385


Webb, N. M. (1983). Predicting learning from student interaction: Defining the interaction variables.
Educational Psychologist, 18, 33–41.
White, B. (1984). Designing computer activities to help physics students understand Newton’s laws of
motion. Cognition and Instruction, 1, 69–108.
White, B., & Frederiksen, J. (1998). Inquiry, modeling, and metacognition: Making science accessible
to all students. Cognition and Instruction, 16, 3–118.
Wood, D., Bruner, J., & Ross, G. (1976). The role of tutoring in problem solving. Journal of Child Psy-
chology and Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines, 17, 89–100.
Wu, H., Krajcik, J., & Soloway, E. (2002). Promoting conceptual understanding of chemical represen-
tations: Students’ use of a visualization tool in the classroom. Journal of Research in Science
Teaching, 38, 821–842.
386
QUINTANA ET AL.
